The Roman Missal
The General Instruction
of the Roman Missal
Excerpts from the English translation of *The Roman Missal *© 2010, International
Commission on English in the Liturgy Corporation. All rights reserved.
This  edition  was  prepared  by  the  Liturgy  Office  of  the  Bishops’  Conference  and
includes  particular  adaptations  for  England  and  Wales  ©  2011  Catholic  Bishops’
www.romanmissal.org.uk
Conference of England and Wales.
L i t u r g y
O f f i c e
E N G L A N D
&  W A L E S
**Contents
**
Introduction
*Testimony of an Unaltered Faith*
*Uninterrupted Tradition*
*Accommodation to New Conditions*
1.
The Importance and Dignity of the Celebration
of the Eucharist
2.
The Structure of the Mass, Its Elements and Its Parts
I.  The General Structure of the Mass
II.  The Different Elements of the Mass
*Reading and Explaining the Word of God*
*The Prayers and Other Parts Pertaining to the Priest*
*Other Formulae Occurring during the Celebration*
*The Manner of Pronouncing the Different Texts*
*Gestures and Bodily Posture*
*Silence* 1
III.  The Individual Parts of the Mass 1
A.  The Introductory Rites
*The Entrance* 1
*Reverence to the Altar and Greeting of the Assembled People*
*The Penitential Act*
*The Kyrie Eleison*
*The Gloria in Excelsis*
*The Collect*
B.  The Liturgy of the Word
*Silence* 1
*The Biblical Readings* 1
*The Responsorial Psalm*
*The Acclamation before the Gospel*
*The Homily* 1
*The Profession of Faith*
*The Universal Prayer*
C.  The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*The Preparation of the Gifts*
*The Prayer over the Offerings*
*The Eucharistic Prayer*
*The Communion Rite*
*The Lord’s Prayer*
*The Rite of Peace*
*The Fraction of the Bread*
*Communion*
D.  The Concluding Rites
*Contents 
*
iii
1
1
2
3
6
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
0
10
1
1
11
2
12
12
12
13
13
13
4
4
14
15
5
16
16
17
17
18
18
19
19
19
19
20
21
iv  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
3.
 2
Duties and Ministries in the Mass
I.  The Duties of those in Holy Orders 2
II.  The Functions of the People of God 2
III.  Particular Ministries
2
2
3
23
3
3
Iv.  The Distribution of Functions and the Preparation of the Celebration 24
*The Ministry of the Instituted Acolyte and Lector* 2
*Other Functions* 2
4.
The Different Forms of Celebrating Mass
 2
I.  Mass with the People
*Things to Be Prepared*
A.  Mass without a Deacon
*The Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Word*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist*
*The Concluding Rites* 3
B.  Mass with a Deacon
*The Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Word*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist*
*The Concluding Rites* 3
C.  The Functions of the Acolyte
*The Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist*
D.  The Functions of the Reader
*Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Word*
II.  Concelebrated Mass
*The Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Word*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist*
*The Manner of Pronouncing the Eucharistic Prayer*
*Eucharistic Prayer I, or the Roman Canon* 3
*Eucharistic Prayer II*
*Eucharistic Prayer III*
*Eucharistic Prayer IV*
*The Communion Rite*
*The Concluding Rites* 4
III.  Mass at which only One Minister Participates 4
Iv.
*The Introductory Rites*
*The Liturgy of the Word*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist*
*The Concluding Rites* 4
Some General Norms for all Forms of Mass 4
*Veneration of the Altar and the Book of the Gospels* 4
*Genuflections and Bows*
*Incensation* 4
*The Purification* 4
*Communion under Both Kinds*
6
26
27
27
27
28
29
3
33
33
34
34
5
35
35
36
36
36
36
36
38
38
38
39
9
40
40
40
41
3
3
43
43
44
4
4
4
45
5
6
46
5.
The Arrangement and Ornamentation of Churches
for the Celebration of the Eucharist
General Principles
I.
II.  Arrangement of the Sanctuary for the Sacred Synaxis 5
*The Altar and its Ornamentation*
*The Ambo* 5
*The Chair for the Priest Celebrant and Other Seats*
III.  The Arrangement of the Church
*The Places for the Faithful*
*The Place for the Schola Cantorum and the Musical Instruments* 5
*The Place for the Reservation of the Most Holy Eucharist* 5
*Sacred Images*
6.
The Requisites for the Celebration of Mass
 5
Sacred Furnishings in General 5
I.  The Bread and Wine for Celebrating the Eucharist 5
II.
III.  Sacred vessels
Iv.
v.  Other Things intended for Church Use 5
Sacred vestments
7.
The Choice of
the Mass and its Parts
I.  The Choice of Mass
II.  The Choice of Texts for the Mass 6
*The Readings* 6
*The Orations* 6
*The Eucharistic Prayer*
*The Chants* 6
8.
Masses and Prayers for various Needs and Occasions
and Masses for the Dead
I.  Masses and Prayers for various Needs and Occasions 6
II.  Masses for the Dead
9.
Adaptations within the Competence of Bishops
and Bishops’ Conferences
*Contents  *v
49
49
0
50
2
52
52
52
3
3
54
5
5
5
56
56
8
59
59
0
0
1
61
2
63
3
64
65
vi  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
**Introduction
**
*Introduction  *1
As Christ the Lord was about to celebrate with the disciples the paschal supper
1.
in which he instituted the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, he commanded that a large,
furnished upper room be prepared (*Lk* 22: 12). Indeed, the Church has always judged
that this command also applied to herself whenever she decided about things related
to the disposition of people’s minds, and of places, rites and texts for the Celebration of
the Most Holy Eucharist. The present norms, too, prescribed in keeping with the will of
the Second vatican Council, together with the new Missal with which the Church of the
Roman Rite will henceforth celebrate the Mass, are again a demonstration of this same
solicitude of the Church, of her faith and her unaltered love for the supreme mystery of
the Eucharist, and also attest to her continuous and consistent tradition, even though
certain new elements have been introduced.
*Testimony of an Unaltered Faith
*
2.
The  sacrificial  nature  of  the  Mass,  solemnly  defended  by  the  Council  of  Trent,
because it accords with the universal tradition of the Church,1 was once more stated
by the Second vatican Council, which pronounced these clear words about the Mass:
‘At  the  Last  Supper,  Our  Saviour  instituted  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice  of  his  Body  and
Blood, by which the Sacrifice of his Cross is perpetuated until he comes again; and till
then he entrusts the memorial of his Death and Resurrection to his beloved spouse, the
Church’.2
What is taught in this way by the Council is consistently expressed in the formulae
of the Mass. Moreover, the doctrine which stands out in the following sentence, already
notable  and  concisely  expressed  in  the  ancient  Sacramentary  commonly  called  the
Leonine  –  ‘for  whenever  the  memorial  of  this  sacrifice  is  celebrated  the  work  of  our
redemption  is  accomplished’3  –  is  aptly  and  exactly  expounded  in  the  Eucharistic
Prayers;  for  as  in  these  the  Priest  enacts  the  anamnesis,  while  turned  towards  God
likewise in the name of all the people, he renders thanks and offers the living and holy
sacrifice, that is, the Church’s oblation and the sacrificial victim by whose death God
himself willed to reconcile us to himself;4 and the Priest also prays that the Body and
Blood of Christ may be a sacrifice which is acceptable to the Father and which brings
salvation to the whole world.5
So, in the new Missal the rule of prayer (*lex orandi*) of the Church corresponds to
her perennial rule of faith (*lex credendi*), by which we are truly taught that the sacrifice
of his Cross and its sacramental renewal in the Mass, which Christ the Lord instituted
at the Last Supper and commanded his Apostles to do in his memory, are one and the
same, differing only in the manner of their offering; and as a result, that the Mass is at
one and the same time a sacrifice of praise, thanksgiving, propitiation and satisfaction.
Moreover,  the  wondrous  mystery  of  the  real  presence  of  the  Lord  under  the
3.
Eucharistic species, confirmed by the Second vatican Council6 and other teachings of
the Church’s Magisterium7 in the same sense and with the same doctrine as the Council
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XXII, 17 September 1562: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, nos. 1738-1759.
 Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 47; cf. Dogmatic Consti-
tution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, nos. 3, 28; Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, nos. 2, 4, 5.
 Evening Mass of the Lord’s Supper, Prayer over the Offerings. Cf. *Sacramentarium Veronense*, L.C. Mohlberg editor, no. 93.
 Cf. Eucharistic Prayer III.
 Cf. Eucharistic Prayer Iv.
 Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 7, 47; *Presbyterorum ordinis*, nos. 5, 18.
 Cf. Pius XII, Encyclical Letter, *Humani generis*, 12 August 1950: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *42 (1950), pp. 570-571; Paul vI, Encyclical Let-
ter, *Mysterium fidei*, 3 September 1965: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *57 (1965), pp. 762-769; Paul vI, Solemn Profession of Faith, 30 June 1968,
nos. 24-26: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *60 (1968), pp. 442-443; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May
1967, nos. 3f, 9: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *59 (1967), pp. 543, 547.
2  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
of  Trent  proposed  that  it  must  be  believed,8  is  proclaimed  in  the  celebration  of  the
Mass, not only by the very words of consecration by which Christ is rendered present
through transubstantiation, but also with a sense and a demonstration of the greatest
reverence and adoration which strives for realization in the Eucharistic liturgy. For the
same reason, the Christian people are led to worship this wondrous Sacrament through
adoration in a special way on Thursday of the Lord’s Supper in Holy Week and on the
Solemnity of the Most Holy Body and Blood of Christ.
4.
In  truth,  the  nature  of  the  ministerial  priesthood  proper  to  the  Bishop  and  the
Priest, who offer the Sacrifice in the person of Christ and who preside over the gathering
of the holy people, shines forth in the form of the rite itself, on account of the more
prominent place and function given to the Priest. The essential elements of this function
are set out and explained clearly and extensively in the Preface for the Chrism Mass
on Thursday of Holy Week, the day, namely, when the institution of the priesthood is
commemorated. For in the Preface is made clear how the conferral of priestly power is
accomplished through the laying on of hands; and, by the listing one by one of its duties,
that power is described which is the continuation of the power of Christ, the High Priest
of the New Testament.
Moreover,  by  this  nature  of  the  ministerial  priesthood,  something  else  is  put
5.
in  its  proper  light,  something  certainly  to  be  held  in  great  esteem,  namely,  the  royal
priesthood of the faithful, whose spiritual sacrifice is brought to completion through
the ministry of the Bishop and the Priests, in union with the Sacrifice of Christ, the sole
Mediator.9 For the celebration of the Eucharist is the action of the whole Church, and in
it each one should carry out solely but totally that which pertains to him, in virtue of the
place of each within the People of God. The result of this is that greater consideration
is also given to some aspects of the celebration that have sometimes been accorded less
attention in the course of the centuries. For this people is the People of God, purchased
by  Christ’s  Blood,  gathered  together  by  the  Lord,  nourished  by  his  word,  the  people
called  to  present  to  God  the  prayers  of  the  entire  human  family,  a  people  that  gives
thanks in Christ for the mystery of salvation by offering his Sacrifice, a people, finally,
that is brought together in unity by Communion in the Body and Blood of Christ. This
people, though holy in its origin, nevertheless grows constantly in holiness by conscious,
active, and fruitful participation in the mystery of the Eucharist.10
*Uninterrupted Tradition
*
When it set out its instructions for the renewal of the Order of Mass, the Second
6.
vatican  Council,  using,  namely,  the  same  words  as  did  St.  Pius  v  in  the  Apostolic
Constitution *Quo primum*, by which the Missal of Trent was promulgated in 1570, also
ordered, among other things, that a number of rites be restored ‘to the original norm
of the holy Fathers’.11 From the fact that the same words are used, it can be noted how
the  two  Roman  Missals,  although  four  centuries  have  intervened,  embrace  one  and
the  same  tradition.  Furthermore,  if  the  inner  elements  of  this  tradition  are  reflected
upon, it is also understood how outstandingly and felicitously the older Roman Missal
is brought to fulfilment in the later one.
In  truly  difficult  times,  when  the  Catholic  faith  in  the  sacrificial  nature  of  the
7.
Mass, the ministerial priesthood, and the real and perpetual presence of Christ under
the Eucharistic species were called into question, St. Pius v was first of all concerned
with preserving the more recent tradition, then unjustly assailed, introducing only very
slight changes into the sacred rite. In fact, the Missal of 1570 differs very little from the
8
9
10
11
 Cf. Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XIII, 11 October 1551: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, nos. 1635-1661.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 2.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 11.
* Ibidem*, no. 50
*Introduction  *3
very first printed edition of 1474, which in turn faithfully takes up again the Missal used
in the time of Pope Innocent III. Moreover, manuscript books in the vatican Library,
even though they provided material for several textual emendations, by no means made
it possible to pursue inquiry into ‘ancient and approved authors’ further back than the
liturgical commentaries of the Middle Ages.
Today, however, innumerable writings of scholars have shed light on the ‘norm of
8.
the holy Fathers’ which the revisers of the Missal of St. Pius v assiduously followed. For
following the first publication in 1571 of the Sacramentary called the Gregorian, critical
editions  of  other  ancient  Roman  and  Ambrosian  Sacramentaries  were  disseminated,
often  in  printed  form,  as  were  ancient  Hispanic  and  Gallican  liturgical  books;  these
editions brought to light numerous prayers of no slight spiritual value but previously
unknown.
In the same way, traditions of the first centuries, before the rites of East and West
were  formed,  are  now  better  known  because  of  the  discovery  of  so  many  liturgical
documents.
Furthermore,  continuing  progress  in  the  study  of  the  holy  Fathers  has  also  shed
upon the theology of the mystery of the Eucharist the light brought by the doctrine of
such illustrious Fathers of Christian antiquity as St. Irenaeus, St. Ambrose, St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, and St. John Chrysostom.
Hence, the ‘norm of the holy Fathers’ requires not only the preservation of what
9.
our immediate forebears have handed on to us, but also an understanding and a more
profound pondering of the Church’s entire past ages and of all the ways in which her
one faith has been expressed in forms of human and social culture so greatly differing
among themselves, indeed, as those prevailing in the Semitic, Greek, and Latin regions.
Moreover, this broader view allows us to see how the Holy Spirit endows the People
of God with a marvellous fidelity in preserving the unalterable deposit of faith, even
though there is a very great variety of prayers and rites.
*Accommodation to New Conditions
*
10.
Hence,  the  new  Missal,  while  bearing  witness  to  the  Roman  Church’s  rule  of
prayer (*lex orandi*), also safeguards the deposit of faith handed down by the more recent
Councils and marks in its turn a step of great importance in liturgical tradition.
For,  when  the  Fathers  of  the  Second  vatican  Council  reaffirmed  the  dogmatic
pronouncements  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  they  spoke  at  a  far  different  time  in  world
history,  and,  for  that  reason,  were  able  to  bring  forward  proposals  and  measures
regarding pastoral life that could not have even been foreseen four centuries earlier.
11.
The  Council  of  Trent  had  already  recognized  the  great  catechetical  usefulness
contained in the celebration of Mass but was unable to bring out all its consequences in
regard to actual practice. In fact, many at that time requested that permission be given
to  use  the  vernacular  in  celebrating  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice.  To  such  a  request,  the
Council, by reason of the circumstances of that age, judged it a matter of duty to answer
by insisting once more on the teaching of the Church as had been handed on, according
to  which  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice  is  in  the  first  place  the  action  of  Christ  himself,
4  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
whose  inherent  efficacy  is  therefore  unaffected  by  the  manner  in  which  the  faithful
participate in it. The Council for this reason stated in these firm and likewise measured
words: ‘Although the Mass contains much instruction for the faithful people, it did not
seem  to  the  Fathers  expedient,  however,  that  it  be  celebrated  indiscriminately  in  the
vernacular’.12 And the Council declared worthy of censure anyone maintaining that ‘the
rite of the Roman Church, in which part of the Canon and the words of consecration
are pronounced in a low voice, is to be condemned, or that the Mass must be celebrated
only in the vernacular’.13 Nevertheless, at the same time as it prohibited the use of the
vernacular in the Mass, it ordered, on the other hand, pastors of souls to put appropriate
catechesis in its place: ‘lest Christ’s flock go hungry… the Holy Synod commands pastors
and  each  and  all  of  those  others  having  the  care  of  souls  that  frequently  during  the
celebration of Mass, either personally or through others, they should explain what is
read at Mass; and expound, among other things, something of the mystery of this most
holy Sacrifice, especially on Sundays and feast days’.14
Hence, the Second vatican Council, having come together in order to accommodate
12.
the Church to the requirements of her proper apostolic office precisely in these times,
considered  thoroughly,  as  had  the  Council  of  Trent,  the  catechetical  and  pastoral
character of the Sacred Liturgy.15 And since no Catholic would now deny a sacred rite
celebrated in Latin to be legitimate and efficacious, the Council was also able to concede
that  ‘not  rarely  adopting  the  vernacular  language  may  be  of  great  usefulness  for  the
people’ and gave permission for it to be used.16 The eagerness with which this measure
was everywhere received has certainly been so great that it has led, under the guidance
of the Bishops and the Apostolic See itself, to permission for all liturgical celebrations in
which the people participate to be in the vernacular, so that the people may more fully
understand the mystery which is celebrated.
In  this  regard,  although  the  use  of  the  vernacular  in  the  Sacred  Liturgy  is  a
13.
means, admittedly of great importance, for expressing more clearly catechesis on the
mystery,  a  catechesis  inherent  in  the  celebration  itself,  the  Second  vatican  Council
ordered additionally that certain prescriptions of the Council of Trent that had not been
followed everywhere be brought to fruition, such as the Homily to be given on Sundays
and feast days17 and the faculty to interject certain explanations during the sacred rites
themselves.18
Above all, the Second vatican Council, which recommended ‘that more perfect form
of participation in the Mass by which the faithful, after the Priest’s Communion, receive
the Lord’s Body from the same Sacrifice’,19 called for another desire of the Fathers of
Trent to be put into effect, namely, that for the sake of a fuller participation in the Holy
Eucharist ‘at each Mass the faithful present should communicate not only by spiritual
desire but also by sacramental reception of the Eucharist’.20
Prompted by the same intention and pastoral zeal, the Second vatican Council was
14.
able to give renewed consideration to what was established by Trent on Communion
under both kinds. And indeed, since nowadays the doctrinal principles on the complete
efficacy of Eucharistic Communion received under the species of bread alone are not in
any way called into question, the Council gave permission for the reception on occasion
of  Communion  under  both  kinds,  because  this  clearer  form  of  the  sacramental  sign
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
 Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XXII, *Doctrina de ss. Missae sacrificio*, cap. 8, 17 September 1562: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no.
1749.
*Ibidem*, cap. 9: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no. 1759.
*Ibidem*, cap. 8: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no. 1749.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 33.
*Ibidem*, no. 36.
*Ibidem*, no. 52.
*Ibidem*, no. 35, 3.
*Ibidem*, no. 55.
 Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XXII, *Doctrina de ss. Missae sacrificio*, cap. 6: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no. 1747.
*Introduction  *5
offers a particular opportunity for understanding more deeply the mystery in which the
faithful participate.21
In  this  manner  the  Church,  while  remaining  faithful  to  her  office  as  teacher  of
15.
truth, safeguarding ‘things old’, that is, the deposit of tradition, fulfils at the same time
the duty of examining and prudently adopting ‘things new’ (cf. *Mt* 13: 52).
For  part  of  the  new  Missal  orders  the  prayers  of  the  Church  in  a  way  more  open
to the needs of our times. Of this kind are above all the Ritual Masses and Masses for
various Needs, in which tradition and new elements are appropriately brought together.
Thus,  while  a  great  number  of  expressions,  drawn  from  the  Church’s  most  ancient
tradition and familiar through the many editions of the Roman Missal, have remained
unchanged,  numerous  others  have  been  accommodated  to  the  needs  and  conditions
proper to our own age, and still others, such as the prayers for the Church, for the laity,
for the sanctification of human labour, for the community of all nations, and certain
needs proper to our era, have been newly composed, drawing on the thoughts and often
the very phrasing of the recent documents of the Council.
On  account,  moreover,  of  the  same  attitude  toward  the  new  state  of  the  world  as
it now is, it seemed to cause no harm at all to so revered a treasure if some phrases
were changed so that the language would be in accord with that of modern theology
and  would  truly  reflect  the  current  state  of  the  Church’s  discipline.  Hence,  several
expressions regarding the evaluation and use of earthly goods have been changed, as
have several which alluded to a certain form of outward penance which was proper to
other periods of the Church’s past.
In this way, finally, the liturgical norms of the Council of Trent have certainly been
completed and perfected in many particulars by those of the Second vatican Council,
which has carried into effect the efforts to bring the faithful closer to the Sacred Liturgy
that have been taken up these last four centuries and especially those of recent times,
and above all the attention to the Liturgy promoted by St. Pius X and his Successors.
21
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 55.
6  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
CHAPTER I
**The Importance and Dignity  
**
**of the Celebration of the Eucharist
**
The celebration of Mass, as the action of Christ and of the People of God arrayed
16.
hierarchically, is the centre of the whole of Christian life for the Church both universal
and local, as well as for each of the faithful individually.22 For in it is found the high point
both of the action by which God sanctifies the world in Christ and of the worship that
the human race offers to the Father, adoring him through Christ, the Son of God, in the
Holy Spirit.23 In it, moreover, during the course of the year, the mysteries of redemption
are celebrated so as to be in some way made present.24 As to the other sacred actions
and all the activities of the Christian life, these are bound up with it, flow from it, and
are ordered to it.25
It is, therefore, of the greatest importance that the celebration of the Mass or the
17.
Lord’s Supper be so ordered that the sacred ministers and the faithful taking part in it,
according to the state proper to each, may draw from it more abundantly26 those fruits,
to  obtain  which,  Christ  the  Lord  instituted  the  Eucharistic  Sacrifice  of  his  Body  and
Blood and entrusted it as the memorial of his Passion and Resurrection to the Church,
his beloved Bride.27
This  will  fittingly  come  about  if,  with  due  regard  for  the  nature  and  other
18.
circumstances of each liturgical assembly, the entire celebration is arranged in such a
way that it leads to a conscious, active, and full participation of the faithful, namely in
body and in mind, a participation fervent with faith, hope, and charity, of the sort which
is desired by the Church and which is required by the very nature of the celebration and
to which the Christian people have a right and duty in virtue of their Baptism.28
Even  though  it  is  on  occasion  not  possible  to  have  the  presence  and  active
19.
participation  of  the  faithful,  which  manifest  more  clearly  the  ecclesial  nature  of  the
celebration,29 the celebration of the Eucharist is always endowed with its own efficacy
and dignity, since it is the act of Christ and of the Church, in which the Priest fulfils his
own principal function and always acts for the sake of the people’s salvation.
Hence the Priest is recommended to celebrate the Eucharistic Sacrifice, insofar as he
can, even daily.30
Since, however, the celebration of the Eucharist, like the entire Liturgy, is carried
20.
out by means of perceptible signs by which the faith is nourished, strengthened, and
expressed,31 the greatest care is to be taken that those forms and elements proposed by
the Church are chosen and arranged, which, given the circumstances of persons and
places, more effectively foster active and full participation and more aptly respond to
the spiritual needs of the faithful.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 41; Dogmatic Con-
stitution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, no. 11; Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, nos. 2, 5, 6; Decree
on the Pastoral Office of Bishops, *Christus Dominus*, no. 30; Decree on Ecumenism, *Unitatis redintegratio*, no. 15; Sacred Congregation
of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, nos. 3e, 6: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *59 (1967), pp. 542, 544-545.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 10.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 102.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 10; cf. Decree on the
Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 5.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 14, 19, 26, 28, 30.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 47.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 14.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 41.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 13; *Code of Canon 
*
*Law*, can. 904.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 59.
21.
Hence this Instruction aims both to offer general lines for a suitable ordering of
the celebration of the Eucharist and to explain the rules by which individual forms of
celebration may be arranged.32
The  celebration  of  the  Eucharist  in  a  particular  Church  is  of  the  utmost
22.
importance.
For the Diocesan Bishop, the prime steward of the mysteries of God in the particular
Church entrusted to his care, is the moderator, promoter, and guardian of the whole of
liturgical life.33 In celebrations that take place with the Bishop presiding, and especially
in  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist  by  the  Bishop  himself  with  the  Presbyterate,  the
Deacons,  and  the  people  taking  part,  the  mystery  of  the  Church  is  manifest.  Hence,
solemn celebrations of Mass of this sort must be exemplary for the entire diocese.
The Bishop should therefore be determined that the Priests, the Deacons, and the
lay Christian faithful grasp ever more deeply the genuine significance of the rites and
liturgical texts, and thereby be led to the active and fruitful celebration of the Eucharist.
To that end, he should also be vigilant in ensuring that the dignity of these celebrations
be enhanced and, in promoting such dignity, the beauty of the sacred place, of the music,
and of art should contribute as greatly as possible.
Moreover,  in  order  that  such  a  celebration  may  correspond  more  fully  to
23.
the  prescriptions  and  spirit  of  the  Sacred  Liturgy,  and  also  in  order  that  its  pastoral
effectiveness be enhanced, certain accommodations and adaptations are set out in this
General Instruction and in the Order of Mass.
24.
These adaptations consist, for the most part, in the choice of certain rites or texts,
that is, of the chants, readings, prayers, explanatory interventions, and gestures capable
of responding better to the needs, the preparation, and the culture of the participants
and which are entrusted to the Priest Celebrant. However, the Priest will remember that
he is the servant of the Sacred Liturgy and that he himself is not permitted, on his own
initiative, to add, to remove, or to change anything in the celebration of Mass.34
In  addition,  at  the  proper  place  in  the  Missal  are  indicated  certain  adaptations
25.
which in accordance with the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy pertain respectively to
the Diocesan Bishop or to the Conference of Bishops35 (cf. below nos. 387, 388–393).
As  for  variations  and  the  more  profound  adaptations  which  give  consideration
26.
to  the  traditions and culture of peoples and regions, to be introduced in accordance
with article 40 of the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, for reasons of usefulness or
necessity, those norms set out in the *Instruction on the Roman Liturgy and Inculturation*36
and below in nos. 395–399 are to be observed.
32
33
34
35
36
 Special celebrations of Mass should observe the guidelines established for them: For Masses with particular groups, cf. Sacred Congre-
gation for Divine Worship, Instruction, *Actio pastoralis*, 15 May 1969: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *61 (1969), pp. 806-811; for Masses with
children, cf. Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship, *Directory for Masses with Children*, 1 November 1973: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *66
(1974), pp. 30-46; for the manner of joining the Hours of the Office with the Mass, cf. Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship, *Gen-
*
*eral Instruction of the Liturgy of the Hours*, nos. 93-98; for the manner of joining certain blessings and the crowning of an image of the
Blessed virgin Mary with the Mass, cf. *Rituale Romanum, De Benedictionibus, editio typica*, 1984, *Praenotanda*, no. 28; *Ordo coronandi 
*
*imaginem beatae Mariae Virginis, editio typica*, 1981, nos. 10 and 14.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Decree on the Pastoral Office of Bishops, *Christus Dominus*, no. 15; cf. also Constitution
on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 41.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 22.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy. *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 38, 40; Paul vI,
Apostolic Constitution, *Missale Romanum, *above.
 Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Varietates legitimae*, 25 January 1994: *Acta Apos-
*
*tolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), pp. 288-314.
8  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
CHAPTER II
**The Structure of the Mass,  
**
**Its Elements and Its Parts
**
I.  THE GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE MASS
At Mass or the Lord’s Supper the People of God is called together, with a Priest
27.
presiding and acting in the person of Christ, to celebrate the memorial of the Lord or
Eucharistic Sacrifice.37 In an outstanding way there applies to such a local gathering of
the holy Church the promise of Christ: ‘Where two or three are gathered in my name,
there  am  I  in  their  midst’  (Mt  18:  20).  For  in  the  celebration  of  Mass,  in  which  the
Sacrifice  of  the  Cross  is  perpetuated,38  Christ  is  really  present  in  the  very  assembly
gathered in his name, in the person of the minister, in his word, and indeed substantially
and uninterruptedly under the Eucharistic species.39
28.
The Mass consists in some sense of two parts, namely the Liturgy of the Word and
the Liturgy of the Eucharist, these being so closely interconnected that they form but
one single act of worship.40 For in the Mass is spread the table both of God’s Word and
of the Body of Christ, and from it the faithful are to be instructed and refreshed.41 There
are also certain rites that open and conclude the celebration.
II.  THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS OF THE MASS
*Reading and Explaining the Word of God
*
When  the Sacred Scriptures are read in  the Church, God himself speaks to his
29.
people, and Christ, present in his word, proclaims the Gospel.
Therefore,  the  readings  from  the  Word  of  God  are  to  be  listened  to  reverently  by
everyone, for they are an element of the greatest importance in the Liturgy. Although
in the readings from Sacred Scripture the Word of God is addressed to all people of
whatever  era  and  is  understandable  to  them,  a  fuller  understanding  and  a  greater
efficaciousness of the word is nevertheless fostered by a living commentary on the word,
that is, by the Homily, as part of the liturgical action.42
*The Prayers and Other Parts Pertaining to the Priest
*
30.
Among  those  things  assigned  to  the  Priest,  the  prime  place  is  occupied  by  the
Eucharistic  Prayer,  which  is  the  high  point  of  the  whole  celebration.  Next  are  the
orations, that is to say, the Collect, the Prayer over the Offerings, and the Prayer after
Communion.  These  prayers  are  addressed  to  God  by  the  Priest  who  presides  over
the assembly in the person of Christ, in the name of the entire holy people and of all
present.43 Hence they are rightly called the ‘presidential prayers’.
Likewise it is also for the Priest, in the exercise of his office of presiding over the
31.
gathered assembly, to offer certain explanations that are foreseen in the rite itself. Where
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 5; Constitution
on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 33.
 Cf. Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XXII, *Doctrina de ss. Missae sacrificio*, cap. 1: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no. 1740; Paul vI,
Solemn Profession of Faith, 30 June 1968, no. 24: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 60 (1968), p. 442.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 7; Paul vI, Encyclical
Letter, *Mysterium fidei*, 3 September 1965: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 57 (1965), p. 764; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharis-
*
*ticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 9: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 547.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 56; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 3: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 542.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 48, 51; Dogmatic
Constitution on Divine Revelation, *Dei Verbum*, no. 21; Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 4.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 7, 33, 52.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 33.
this is laid down by the rubrics, the celebrant is permitted to adapt them somewhat so
that they correspond to the capacity for understanding of those participating. However,
the  Priest  should  always  take  care  to  keep  to  the  sense  of  the  explanatory  text  given
in the Missal and to express it in just a few words. It is also for the presiding Priest to
regulate the Word of God and to impart the final blessing. He is permitted, furthermore,
in a very few words, to give the faithful an introduction to the Mass of the day (after the
initial Greeting and before the Penitential Act), to the Liturgy of the Word (before the
readings), and to the Eucharistic Prayer (before the Preface), though never during the
Eucharistic Prayer itself; he may also make concluding comments regarding the entire
sacred action before the Dismissal.
The nature of the ‘presidential’ parts requires that they be spoken in a loud and
32.
clear voice and that everyone listen to them attentively.44 Therefore, while the Priest is
pronouncing them, there should be no other prayers or singing, and the organ or other
musical instruments should be silent.
33.
For  the  Priest,  as  the  one  who  presides,  expresses  prayers  in  the  name  of  the
Church and of the assembled community; but at times he prays only in his own name,
asking that he may exercise his ministry with greater attention and devotion. Prayers of
this kind, which occur before the reading of the Gospel, at the Preparation of the Gifts,
and also before and after the Communion of the Priest, are said quietly.
*Other Formulae Occurring during the Celebration
*
45 both
Since the celebration of Mass by its nature has a ‘communitarian’ character,
34.
the dialogues between the Priest and the assembled faithful, and the acclamations are of
great significance;46 for they are not simply outward signs of communal celebration but
foster and bring about communion between Priest and people.
35.
The  acclamations  and  the  responses  of  the  faithful  to  the  Priest’s  greetings  and
prayers constitute that level of active participation that is to be made by the assembled
faithful in every form of the Mass, so that the action of the whole community may be
clearly expressed and fostered.47
Other  parts,  most  useful  for  expressing  and  fostering  the  active  participation
36.
of the faithful, and which are assigned to the whole gathering, include especially the
Penitential Act, the Profession of Faith, the Universal Prayer, and the Lord’s Prayer.
37.
a.
b.
Finally, among other formulae:
Some constitute an independent rite or act, such as the
Gloria in excelsis* (Glory 
*
*to God in the highest), *the Responsorial Psalm, the Alleluia and verse before the
Gospel, the Sanctus* (Holy, Holy, Holy)*, the Memorial Acclamation, and the chant
after Communion;
Others,  on  the  other  hand,  accompany  some  other  rite,  such  as  the  chants  at
the Entrance, at the Offertory, at the fraction (Agnus Dei, *Lamb of God) *and at
Communion.
*The Manner of Pronouncing the Different Texts
*
38.
In texts that are to be pronounced in a loud and clear voice, whether by the Priest
or the Deacon, or by a reader, or by everyone, the voice should correspond to the genre
of the text itself, that is, depending upon whether it is a reading, a prayer, an explanatory
44
45
46
47
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 14: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 304.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 26-27; Sacred Con-
gregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 3d: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 542.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 30.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 16a: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 305.
10  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
comment,  an  acclamation,  or  a  sung  text;  it  should  also  be  suited  to  the  form  of
celebration and to the solemnity of the gathering. Consideration should also be given to
the characteristics of different languages and of the culture of different peoples.
Therefore,  in  the  rubrics  and  in  the  norms  that  follow,  words  such  as  ‘say’  and
‘proclaim’ are to be understood either of singing or of reciting, with due regard for the
principles stated here above.
*The Importance of Singing
*
The  Christian  faithful  who  come  together  as  one  in  expectation  of  the  Lord’s
39.
coming are instructed by the Apostle Paul to sing together Psalms, hymns, and spiritual
canticles (cf. Col 3: 16). Singing is the sign of the heart’s joy (cf. Acts 2: 46). Thus St.
Augustine  says  rightly,  ‘Singing  is  for  one  who  loves’,48  and  there  is  also  an  ancient
proverb: ‘Whoever sings well prays twice over’.
Great  importance  should  therefore  be  attached  to  the  use  of  singing  in  the
40.
celebration of the Mass, with due consideration for the culture of peoples and abilities
of each liturgical assembly. Although it is not always necessary (e.g., in weekday Masses)
to sing all the texts that are in principle meant to be sung, every care should be taken
that singing by the ministers and the people not be absent in celebrations that occur on
Sundays and on Holydays of Obligation.
However, in the choosing of the parts actually to be sung, preference is to be given to
those that are of greater importance and especially to those which are to be sung by the
Priest or the Deacon or a reader, with the people replying, or by the Priest and people
together.49
The main place should be given, all things being equal, to Gregorian chant, as being
41.
proper to the Roman Liturgy. Other kinds of sacred music, in particular polyphony, are
in no way excluded, provided that they correspond to the spirit of the liturgical action
and that they foster the participation of all the faithful.50
Since the faithful from different countries come together ever more frequently, it is
desirable that they know how to sing together at least some parts of the Ordinary of the
Mass in Latin, especially the Profession of Faith and the Lord’s Prayer, according to the
simpler settings.51
*Gestures and Bodily Posture
*
42.
The gestures and bodily posture of both the Priest, the Deacon, and the ministers,
and also of the people, must be conducive to making the entire celebration resplendent
with  beauty  and  noble  simplicity,  to  making  clear  the  true  and  full  meaning  of  its
different parts, and to fostering the participation of all.52 Attention must therefore be
paid to what is determined by this *General Instruction* and by the traditional practice
of the Roman Rite and to what serves the common spiritual good of the People of God,
rather than private inclination or arbitrary choice.
A common bodily posture, to be observed by all those taking part, is a sign of the
unity  of  the  members  of  the  Christian  community  gathered  together  for  the  Sacred
Liturgy, for it expresses the intentions and spiritual attitude of the participants and also
fosters them.
48
49
50
51
52
 St. Augustine of Hippo, *Sermo* 336, 1: PL 38: 1472.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, nos. 7, 16: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 302,
305.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 116; cf. also no. 30.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 54; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 59: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 891; Instruction, *Musicam 
*
*sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 47: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 314.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 30, 34; cf. also no.
21.
43.
The faithful should stand from the beginning of the Entrance Chant, or while the
Priest approaches the altar, until the end of the Collect; for the Alleluia Chant before
the Gospel; while the Gospel itself is proclaimed; during the Profession of Faith and
the  Universal  Prayer;  and  from  the  invitation,  Orate,  fratres  (*Pray,  brethren*),  before
the Prayer over the Offerings until the end of Mass, except at the places indicated here
below.
The faithful should sit, on the other hand, during the readings before the Gospel and
the Responsorial Psalm and for the Homily and during the Preparation of the Gifts at the
Offertory; and, if appropriate, during the period of sacred silence after Communion.
They should kneel, on the other hand, at the Consecration, except when prevented
on occasion by ill health, or for reasons of lack of space, of the large number of people
present, or for another reasonable cause. However, those who do not kneel ought to
make a profound bow when the Priest genuflects after the Consecration.
It  is  for  the  Conference  of  Bishops,  in  accordance  with  the  norm  of  law,  to  adapt
the  gestures  and  bodily  postures  described  in  the  Order  of  Mass  to  the  culture  and
reasonable traditions of peoples.53 However, attention must be paid to ensuring that such
adaptations correspond to the meaning and character of each part of the celebration.
Where it is the practice for the people to remain kneeling after the Sanctus* (Holy, Holy, 
*
*Holy)* until the end of the Eucharistic Prayer and before Communion when the Priest
says, Ecce Agnus Dei (*Behold the Lamb of God*), it is laudable for this practice to be
retained.
For the sake of uniformity in gestures and bodily postures during one and the same
celebration, the faithful should follow the instructions which the Deacon, a lay minister,
or the Priest gives, according to what is laid down in the Missal.
Among gestures are included also actions and processions, by which the Priest,
44.
with the Deacon and ministers, goes to the altar; the Deacon carries the Evangeliary or
*Book of the Gospels *to the ambo before the proclamation of the Gospel; the faithful bring
up the gifts and come forward to receive Communion. It is appropriate that actions and
processions of this sort be carried out with decorum while the chants proper to them
are sung, in accordance with the norms laid down for each.
*Silence
*
Sacred silence also, as part of the celebration, is to be observed at the designated
45.
times.54  Its  nature,  however,  depends  on  the  moment  when  it  occurs  in  the  different
parts  of  the  celebration.  For  in  the  Penitential  Act  and  again  after  the  invitation  to
pray, individuals recollect themselves; whereas after a reading or after the Homily, all
meditate briefly on what they have heard; then after Communion, they praise God in
their hearts and pray to him.
Even  before  the  celebration  itself,  it  is  a  praiseworthy  practice  for  silence  to  be
observed in the church, in the sacristy, in the vesting room, and in adjacent areas, so
that  all  may  dispose  themselves  to  carry  out  the  sacred  celebration  in  a  devout  and
fitting manner.
III.  THE INDIvIDUAL PARTS OF THE MASS
A.  The Introductory Rites
The rites that precede the Liturgy of the Word, namely, the Entrance, the Greeting,
46.
the Penitential Act, the Kyrie, the Gloria in excelsis* (Glory to God in the highest) *and
Collect, have the character of a beginning, an introduction, and a preparation.
53
54
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 40; Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Varietates legitimae*, 25 January
1994, no. 41: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), p. 304.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 30; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 17: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 305.
12  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
Their  purpose  is  to  ensure  that  the  faithful,  who  come  together  as  one,  establish
communion  and  dispose  themselves  properly  to  listen  to  the  Word  of  God  and  to
celebrate the Eucharist worthily.
In certain celebrations that are combined with Mass according to the norms of the
liturgical books, the Introductory Rites are omitted or take place in a particular way.
*The Entrance
*
47.
When  the  people  are  gathered,  and  as  the  Priest  enters  with  the  Deacon  and
ministers, the Entrance Chant begins. Its purpose is to open the celebration, foster the
unity of those who have been gathered, introduce their thoughts to the mystery of the
liturgical time or festivity, and accompany the procession of the Priest and ministers.
48.
This chant is sung alternately by the choir and the people or similarly by a cantor
and the people, or entirely by the people, or by the choir alone. In the dioceses of England
Wales the Entrance Chant may be chosen from among the following: the antiphon with
its Psalm from the *Graduale Romanum* or the *Graduale Simplex*, or another chant that
is suited to the sacred action, the day, or the time of year,55 and whose text has been
approved by the Conference of Bishops of England and Wales.
If there is no singing at the Entrance, the antiphon given in the Missal is recited either
by the faithful, or by some of them, or by a reader; otherwise, it is recited by the Priest
himself, who may even adapt it as an introductory explanation (cf. no. 31).
*Reverence to the Altar and Greeting of the Assembled People
*
When they have arrived at the sanctuary, the Priest, the Deacon, and the ministers
49.
reverence the altar with a profound bow.
Moreover, as an expression of veneration, the Priest and Deacon then kiss the altar
itself; the Priest, if appropriate, also incenses the cross and the altar.
When the Entrance Chant is concluded, the Priest stands at the chair and, together
50.
with the whole gathering, signs himself with the Sign of the Cross. Then by means of
the Greeting he signifies the presence of the Lord to the assembled community. By this
greeting and the people’s response, the mystery of the Church gathered together is made
manifest.
After the greeting of the people, the Priest, or the Deacon, or a lay minister may very
briefly introduce the faithful to the Mass of the day.
*The Penitential Act
*
After this, the Priest calls upon the whole community to take part in the Penitential
51.
Act,  which,  after  a  brief  pause  for  silence,  it  does  by  means  of  a  formula  of  general
confession. The rite concludes with the Priest’s absolution, which, however, lacks the
efficacy of the Sacrament of Penance.
From time to time on Sundays, especially in Easter Time, instead of the customary
Penitential Act, the blessing and sprinkling of water may take place as a reminder of
Baptism.56
*The Kyrie Eleison
*
After the Penitential Act, the
Kyrie, eleison (*Lord, have mercy*), is always begun,
52.
unless it has already been part of the Penitential Act. Since it is a chant by which the
faithful acclaim the Lord and implore his mercy, it is usually executed by everyone, that
is to say, with the people and the choir or cantor taking part in it.
55
56
 Cf. John Paul II, Apostolic Letter, *Dies Domini*, 31 May 1998, no. 50: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 90 (1998), p. 745.
 Cf. below, pp. 0000-0000.
Each acclamation is usually pronounced twice, though it is not to be excluded that it
be repeated several times, by reason of the character of the various languages, as well as
of the artistry of the music or of other circumstances. When the Kyrie is sung as a part
of the Penitential Act, a ‘trope’ precedes each acclamation.
*The Gloria in Excelsis
*
The
53.
Gloria in excelsis* (Glory to God in the highest) *is a most ancient and venerable
hymn  by  which  the  Church,  gathered  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  glorifies  and  entreats  God
the Father and the Lamb. The text of this hymn may not be replaced by any other. It is
intoned by the Priest or, if appropriate, by a cantor or by the choir; but it is sung either
by everyone together, or by the people alternately with the choir, or by the choir alone.
If not sung, it is to be recited either by everybody together or by two choirs responding
one to the other.
It is sung or said on Sundays outside Advent and Lent, and also on Solemnities and
Feasts, and at particular celebrations of a more solemn character.
*The Collect
*
Next the Priest calls upon the people to pray and everybody, together with the
54.
Priest, observes a brief silence so that they may become aware of being in God’s presence
and may call to mind their intentions. Then the Priest pronounces the prayer usually
called the ‘Collect’ and through which the character of the celebration finds expression.
By an ancient tradition of the Church, the Collect prayer is usually addressed to God the
Father, through Christ, in the Holy Spirit,57 and is concluded with a Trinitarian ending,
or longer ending, in the following manner:
•
•
•
If the prayer is directed to the Father:
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, your Son,
who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit, one God, for ever
and ever;
If it is directed to the Father, but the Son is mentioned at the end:
reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit, one God, for ever and ever;
If it is directed to the Son:
the Holy Spirit, one God, for ever and ever.
Who live and reign with God the Father in the unity of
Who lives and
The  people,  joining  in  this  petition,  make  the  prayer  their  own  by  means  of  the
acclamation Amen.
At Mass only a single Collect is ever said.
B.  The Liturgy of the Word
The main part of the Liturgy of the Word is made up of the readings from Sacred
55.
Scripture  together  with  the  chants  occurring  between  them.  As  for  the  Homily,  the
Profession of Faith and the Universal Prayer, they develop and conclude it. For in the
readings, as explained by the Homily, God speaks to his people,58 opening up to them
the  mystery  of  redemption  and  salvation,  and  offering  spiritual  nourishment;  and
Christ himself is present through his word in the midst of the faithful.59 By silence and
by singing, the people make this divine word their own, and affirm their adherence to it
by means of the Profession of Faith; finally, having been nourished by the divine word,
the people pour out their petitions by means of the Universal Prayer for the needs of the
whole Church and for the salvation of the whole world.
57
58
59
 Cf. Tertullian, *Adversus Marcionem*, Iv, 9: *Corpus Christianorum, Series latina* 1, p. 560; Origen, *Disputatio cum Heracleida*, no. 4, 24:
*Sources chrétiennes* 67, p. 62; *Statuta Concilii Hipponensis Breviata*, no. 21: *Corpus Christianorum, Series latina* 149, p. 39.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 33.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 7.
14  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
*Silence
*
The Liturgy of the Word is to be celebrated in such a way as to favour meditation,
56.
and so any kind of haste such as hinders recollection is clearly to be avoided. In the
course of it, brief periods of silence are also appropriate, accommodated to the assembled
congregation; by means of these, under the action of the Holy Spirit, the Word of God
may be grasped by the heart and a response through prayer may be prepared. It may be
appropriate to observe such periods of silence, for example, before the Liturgy of the
Word itself begins, after the First and Second Reading, and lastly at the conclusion of
the Homily.60
*The Biblical Readings
*
57.
In  the  readings,  the  table  of  God’s  Word  is  spread  before  the  faithful,  and  the
treasures of the Bible are opened to them.61 Hence, it is preferable that the arrangement
of the biblical readings be maintained, for by them the unity of both Testaments and of
salvation history is brought out. Nor is it lawful to replace the readings and Responsorial
Psalm, which contain the Word of God, with other, non-biblical texts.62
In the celebration of the Mass with the people, the readings are always read from
58.
the ambo.
The  function  of  proclaiming  the  readings  is  by  tradition  not  presidential  but
59.
ministerial. Therefore  the  readings  are  to  be  read  by  a  reader,  but  the  Gospel  by  the
Deacon or, in his absence, by another Priest. If, however, a Deacon or another Priest
is not present, the Priest Celebrant himself should read the Gospel, and moreover, if
no other suitable reader is present, the Priest Celebrant should also proclaim the other
readings as well.
After each reading, whoever reads it pronounces the acclamation, and by means of
the reply the assembled people give honour to the Word of God that they have received
in faith and with gratitude.
The reading of the Gospel constitutes the high point of the Liturgy of the Word.
60.
The  Liturgy  itself  teaches  the  great  reverence  that  is  to  be  shown  to  this  reading  by
setting it off from the other readings with special marks of honour, by the fact of which
minister is appointed to proclaim it and by the blessing or prayer with which he prepares
himself; and also by the fact that through their acclamations the faithful acknowledge
and confess that Christ is present and is speaking to them and stand as they listen to
the reading; and by the mere fact of the marks of reverence that are given to the Book
of the Gospels.
*The Responsorial Psalm
*
After the First Reading follows the Responsorial Psalm, which is an integral part
61.
of the Liturgy of the Word and which has great liturgical and pastoral importance, since
it fosters meditation on the Word of God.
The Responsorial Psalm should correspond to each reading and should usually be
taken from the Lectionary.
It is preferable for the Responsorial Psalm to be sung, at least as far as the people’s
response  is  concerned.  Hence  the  psalmist,  or  cantor  of  the  Psalm,  sings  the  Psalm
verses  at  the  ambo  or  another  suitable  place,  while  the  whole  congregation  sits  and
listens, normally taking part by means of the response, except when the Psalm is sung
straight  through,  that  is,  without  a  response.  However,  in  order  that  the  people  may
be  able  to  sing  the  Psalm  response  more  easily,  texts  of  some  responses  and  Psalms
60
61
62
 Cf. Missale Romanum, *Ordo lectionum Missae*, editio typica altera, 1981, no. 28.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 51.
 Cf. John Paul II, Apostolic Letter, *Vicesimus quintus annus*, 4 December 1988, no. 13: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 81 (1989), p. 910.
have been chosen for the different times of the year or for the different categories of
Saints. These may be used instead of the text corresponding to the reading whenever
the Psalm is sung. If the Psalm cannot be sung, then it should be recited in a way that is
particularly suited to fostering meditation on the Word of God.
Instead  of  the  Psalm  assigned  in  the  Lectionary,  there  may  be  sung  either  the
Responsorial Gradual from the *Graduale Romanum*, or the Responsorial Psalm or the
*Alleluia *Psalm from the *Graduale Simplex*, as described in these books.
*The Acclamation before the Gospel
*
After the reading that immediately precedes the Gospel, the
62.
Alleluia or another
chant laid down by the rubrics is sung, as the liturgical time requires. An acclamation of
this kind constitutes a rite or act in itself, by which the gathering of the faithful welcomes
and greets the Lord who is about to speak to them in the Gospel and profess their faith
by means of the chant. It is sung by everybody, standing, and is led by the choir or a
cantor, being repeated as the case requires. The verse, on the other hand, is sung either
by the choir or by a cantor.
a.
b.
Alleluia is sung in every time of year other than Lent. The verses are taken
The
from the Lectionary or the *Graduale*.
Alleluia, the verse before the Gospel as given in the
During Lent, instead of the
Lectionary is sung. It is also possible to sing another Psalm or Tract, as found in
the *Graduale*.
63.
a.
b.
c.
When there is only one reading before the Gospel:
during a time of year when the
the Responsorial Psalm followed by the Alleluia with its verse may be used;
during a time of year when the
verse before the Gospel or the Psalm alone may be used;
the
Alleluia or the verse before the Gospel, if not sung, may be omitted.
Alleluia is prescribed, either an *Alleluia *Psalm or
Alleluia is not foreseen, either the Psalm and the
The Sequence which, except on Easter Sunday and on Pentecost Day, is optional,
64.
is sung before the Alleluia.
*The Homily
*
The Homily is part of the Liturgy and is highly recommended,
63 for it is necessary
65.
for the nurturing of the Christian life. It should be an explanation of some aspect of the
readings from Sacred Scripture or of another text from the Ordinary or the Proper of
the Mass of the day and should take into account both the mystery being celebrated and
the particular needs of the listeners.64
The  Homily  should  ordinarily  be  given  by  the  Priest  Celebrant  himself  or  be
66.
entrusted by him to a concelebrating Priest, or from time to time and, if appropriate,
to the Deacon, but never to a lay person.65 In particular cases and for a just cause, the
Homily may even be given by a Bishop or a Priest who is present at the celebration but
cannot concelebrate.
On Sundays and Holydays of Obligation there is to be a Homily at every Mass that is
celebrated with the people attending and it may not be omitted without a grave reason.
On other days it is recommended, especially on the weekdays of Advent, Lent and Easter
63
64
65
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 52; *Code of Canon 
*
*Law*, can. 767 § 1.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 54: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 890
 Cf. *Code of Canon Law*, can. 767 § 1; Pontifical Commission for the Authentic Interpretation of the *Code of Canon Law*, response to
*dubium *regarding can. 767 § 1: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 79 (1987), p. 1249; Interdicasterial Instruction on certain questions regarding the
collaboration of the non-ordained faithful in the sacred ministry of Priests, *Ecclesiae de mysterio*, 15 August 1997, art. 3: *Acta Apostoli-
*
*cae Sedis* 89 (1997), p. 864.
16  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
Time, as well as on other festive days and occasions when the people come to church in
greater numbers.66
It is appropriate for a brief period of silence to be observed after the Homily.
*The Profession of Faith
*
The  purpose  of  the  Symbol  or  Profession  of  Faith  or  Creed  is  that  the  whole
67.
gathered  people  may  respond  to  the  Word  of  God  proclaimed  in  the  readings  taken
from Sacred Scripture and explained in the Homily and that they may also honour and
confess the great mysteries of the faith by pronouncing the rule of faith in a formula
approved for liturgical use and before the celebration of these mysteries in the Eucharist
begins.
68.
The Creed is to be sung or said by the Priest together with the people on Sundays
and  Solemnities.  It  may  be  said  also  at  particular  celebrations  of  a  more  solemn
character.
If it is sung, it is intoned by the Priest or, if appropriate, by a cantor or by the choir. It
is then sung either by everybody together or by the people alternating with the choir.
If it is not sung, it is to be recited by everybody together or by two choirs responding
one to the other.
*The Universal Prayer
*
In the Universal Prayer or Prayer of the Faithful, the people respond in some sense
69.
to the Word of God which they have received in faith and, exercising the office of their
baptismal priesthood, offer prayers to God for the salvation of all. It is desirable that
there  usually  be  such  a  form  of  prayer  in  Masses  celebrated  with  the  people,  so  that
petitions may be offered for holy Church, for those who govern with authority over us,
for those weighed down by various needs, for all humanity, and for the salvation of the
whole world.67
70.
a.
b.
c.
d.
The series of intentions is usually to be:
for the needs of the Church;
for public authorities and the salvation of the whole world;
for those burdened by any kind of difficulty;
for the local community.
  Nevertheless, in any particular celebration, such as a Confirmation, a Marriage, or
at a Funeral, the series of intentions may be concerned more closely with the particular
occasion.
71.
It  is  for  the  Priest  Celebrant  to  regulate  this  prayer  from  the  chair.  He  himself
begins  it  with  a  brief  introduction,  by  which  he  calls  upon  the  faithful  to  pray,  and
likewise he concludes it with an oration. The intentions announced should be sober, be
composed with a wise liberty and in few words, and they should be expressive of the
prayer of the entire community.
They are announced from the ambo or from another suitable place, by the Deacon or
by a cantor, a reader, or one of the lay faithful.68
The  people,  for  their  part,  stand  and  give  expression  to  their  prayer  either  by  an
invocation said in common after each intention or by praying in silence.
66
67
68
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 53: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 890.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 53.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 56: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 890.
C.  The Liturgy of the Eucharist
At the Last Supper Christ instituted the Paschal Sacrifice and banquet, by which
72.
the  Sacrifice  of  the  Cross  is  continuously  made  present  in  the  Church  whenever  the
Priest, representing Christ the Lord, carries out what the Lord himself did and handed
over to his disciples to be done in his memory.69
For Christ took the bread and the chalice, gave thanks, broke the bread and gave it to
his disciples, saying: Take, eat and drink: this is my Body; this is the chalice of my Blood.
Do this in memory of me. Hence, the Church has arranged the entire celebration of the
Liturgy of the Eucharist in parts corresponding to precisely these words and actions of
Christ, namely:
a.
b.
c.
At the Preparation of the Gifts, bread and wine with water are brought to the altar,
the same elements, that is to say, which Christ took into his hands.
In the Eucharistic Prayer, thanks is given to God for the whole work of salvation,
and the offerings become the Body and Blood of Christ.
Through the fraction and through Communion, the faithful, though many, receive
from the one bread the Lord’s Body and from the one chalice the Lord’s Blood in
the same way that the Apostles received them from the hands of Christ himself.
*The Preparation of the Gifts
*
At the beginning of the Liturgy of the Eucharist the gifts which will become Christ’s
73.
Body and Blood are brought to the altar.
First of all, the altar or Lord’s table, which is the centre of the whole Liturgy of the
is made ready when on it are placed the corporal, purificator, Missal and
Eucharist,70
chalice (unless this last is prepared at the credence table).
The offerings are then brought forward. It is a praiseworthy practice for the bread
and wine to be presented by the faithful. They are then accepted at an appropriate place
by the Priest or the Deacon to be carried to the altar. Even though the faithful no longer
bring from their own possessions the bread and wine intended for the liturgy as was
once the case, nevertheless the rite of carrying up the offerings still keeps its spiritual
efficacy and significance.
Even money or other gifts for the poor or for the Church, brought by the faithful
or collected in the church, are acceptable; given their purpose, they are to be put in a
suitable place away from the Eucharistic table.
The procession bringing the gifts is accompanied by the Offertory Chant (cf. no.
74.
37 b), which continues at least until the gifts have been placed on the altar. The norms
on the manner of singing are the same as for the Entrance Chant (cf. no. 48). Singing
may always accompany the rite at the Offertory, even when there is no procession with
the gifts.
The bread and wine are placed on the altar by the Priest to the accompaniment of
75.
the prescribed formulae; the Priest may incense the gifts placed on the altar and then
incense the cross and the altar itself, so as to signify the Church’s offering and prayer
rising like incense in the sight of God. Next, the Priest, because of his sacred ministry,
and the people, by reason of their baptismal dignity, may be incensed by the Deacon or
by another minister.
Then the Priest washes his hands at the side of the altar, a rite in which the desire
76.
for interior purification finds expression.
69
70
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 47; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 3a, b: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 540-541.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 91: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 898;
Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 24: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 554.
18  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
*The Prayer over the Offerings
*
Once  the  offerings  have  been  placed  on  the  altar  and  the  accompanying  rites
77.
completed, by means of the invitation to pray with the Priest and by means of the Prayer
over the Offerings, the Preparation of the Gifts is concluded and preparation made for
the Eucharistic Prayer.
At  Mass,  a  single  Prayer  over  the  Offerings  is  said,  and  it  ends  with  the  shorter
conclusion, that is: Through Christ our Lord. If, however, the Son is mentioned at the
end of this prayer, the conclusion is: Who lives and reigns for ever and ever.
The  people,  joining  in  this  petition,  make  the  prayer  their  own  by  means  of  the
acclamation Amen.
*The Eucharistic Prayer
*
Now  the  centre  and  high  point  of  the  entire  celebration  begins,  namely,  the
78.
Eucharistic  Prayer  itself,  that  is,  the  prayer  of  thanksgiving  and  sanctification.  The
Priest  calls  upon  the  people  to  lift  up  their  hearts  towards  the  Lord  in  prayer  and
thanksgiving; he associates the people with himself in the Prayer that he addresses in
the name of the entire community to God the Father through Jesus Christ in the Holy
Spirit. Furthermore, the meaning of this Prayer is that the whole congregation of the
faithful joins with Christ in confessing the great deeds of God and in the offering of
Sacrifice. The Eucharistic Prayer requires that everybody listens to it with reverence and
in silence.
The main elements of which the Eucharistic Prayer consists may be distinguished
79.
from one another in this way:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
The
*thanksgiving *(expressed especially in the Preface), in which the Priest, in the
name of the whole of the holy people, glorifies God the Father and gives thanks to
him for the whole work of salvation or for some particular aspect of it, according
to the varying day, festivity, or time of year.
The
*acclamation,*  by  which  the  whole  congregation,  joining  with  the  heavenly
powers, sings the Sanctus* (Holy, Holy, Holy)*. This acclamation, which constitutes
part  of  the  Eucharistic  Prayer  itself,  is  pronounced  by  all  the  people  with  the
Priest.
The
*epiclesis,* in which, by means of particular invocations, the Church implores
the power of the Holy Spirit that the gifts offered by human hands be consecrated,
that  is,  become  Christ’s  Body  and  Blood,  and  that  the  unblemished  sacrificial
victim to be consumed in Communion may be for the salvation of those who will
partake of it.
*Institution narrative and Consecration,* by which, by means of the words and
The
actions of Christ, that Sacrifice is effected which Christ himself instituted during
the Last Supper, when he offered his Body and Blood under the species of bread
and wine, gave them to the Apostles to eat and drink, and leaving with the latter
the command to perpetuate this same mystery.
The
*anamnesis,*  by  which  the  Church,  fulfilling  the  command  that  she  received
from  Christ  the  Lord  through  the  Apostles,  celebrates  the  memorial  of  Christ,
recalling especially his blessed Passion, glorious Resurrection and Ascension into
heaven.
f.
g.
h.
*oblation,*  by  which,  in  this  very  memorial,  the  Church,  in  particular  that
The
gathered here and now, offers the unblemished sacrificial victim in the Holy Spirit
to the Father. The Church’s intention, indeed, is that the faithful not only offer this
unblemished sacrificial victim but also learn to offer their very selves,71 and so day
by day to be brought, through the mediation of Christ, into unity with God and
with each other, so that God may at last be all in all.72
The
*intercessions,*  by  which  expression  is  given  to  the  fact  that  the  Eucharist  is
celebrated in communion with the whole Church, of both heaven and of earth,
and that the oblation is made for her and for all her members, living and dead,
who are called to participate in the redemption and salvation purchased by the
Body and Blood of Christ.
The
is affirmed and concluded by the people’s acclamation Amen.
*concluding doxology,* by which the glorification of God is expressed and which
*The Communion Rite
*
80.
Since the celebration of the Eucharist is the Paschal Banquet, it is desirable that
in  accordance  with  the  Lord’s  command  his  Body  and  Blood  should  be  received  as
spiritual food by those of the faithful who are properly disposed. This is the sense of the
fraction and the other preparatory rites by which the faithful are led more immediately
to Communion.
*The Lord’s Prayer
*
81.
In the Lord’s Prayer a petition is made for daily bread, which for Christians means
principally  the  Eucharistic  Bread,  and  entreating  also  purification  from  sin,  so  that
what is  holy may in truth  be  given to the holy. The Priest pronounces the invitation
to the prayer, and all the faithful say the prayer with him; then the Priest alone adds
the embolism,  which the people conclude by means of the doxology. The embolism,
developing  the  last  petition  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer  itself,  asks  for  deliverance  from  the
power of evil for the whole community of the faithful.
The invitation, the Prayer itself, the embolism, and the doxology by which the people
conclude these things are sung or are said aloud.
*The Rite of Peace
*
82.
There  follows  the  Rite  of  Peace,  by  which  the  Church  entreats  peace  and  unity
for herself and for the whole human family, and the faithful express to each other their
ecclesial communion and mutual charity before communicating in the Sacrament.
As for the actual sign of peace to be given, the manner is to be established by the
Conferences  of  Bishops  in  accordance  with  the  culture  and  customs  of  the  peoples.
However, it is appropriate that each person, in a sober manner, offer the sign of peace
only to those who are nearest.
*The Fraction of the Bread
*
The Priest breaks the Eucharistic Bread, with the assistance, if the case requires, of
83.
the Deacon or a concelebrant. The gesture of breaking bread done by Christ at the Last
Supper, which in apostolic times gave the entire Eucharistic Action its name, signifies
that the many faithful are made one body (1 Cor 10: 17) by receiving Communion from
the one Bread of Life, which is Christ, who for the salvation of the world died and rose
71
72
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 48; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 12: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 548-549.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 48; Decree on the
Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 5; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May
1967, no. 12: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 548-549.
20  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
again. The fraction or breaking of bread is begun after the sign of peace and is carried
out  with  proper  reverence,  and  should  not  be  unnecessarily  prolonged  or  accorded
exaggerated importance. This rite is reserved to the Priest and the Deacon.
The Priest breaks the Bread and puts a piece of the host into the chalice to signify the
unity of the Body and Blood of the Lord in the work of salvation, namely, of the Body of
Jesus Christ, living and glorious. The supplication Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God)* is usually
sung by the choir or cantor with the congregation replying; or at least recited aloud. This
invocation accompanies the fraction of the bread and, for this reason, may be repeated
as many times as necessary until the rite has been completed. The final time it concludes
with the words grant us peace.
*Communion
*
The  Priest  prepares  himself  by  a  prayer,  said  quietly,  so  that  he  may  fruitfully
84.
receive the Body and Blood of Christ. The faithful do the same, praying silently.
Then the Priest shows the faithful the Eucharistic Bread, holding it over the paten or
over the chalice, and invites them to the banquet of Christ; and along with the faithful,
he then makes an act of humility, using the prescribed words from the Gospels.
It  is  most  desirable  that  the  faithful,  just  as  the  Priest  himself  is  bound  to  do,
85.
receive the Lord’s Body from hosts consecrated at the same Mass and that, in the cases
where this is foreseen, they partake of the chalice (cf. no. 283), so that even by means
of the signs Communion may stand out more clearly as a participation in the sacrifice
actually being celebrated.73
86.
While  the  Priest  is  receiving  the  Sacrament,  the  Communion  Chant  is  begun,
its  purpose  being  to  express  the  spiritual  union  of  the  communicants  by  means  of
the unity of their voices, to show gladness of heart, and to bring out more clearly the
‘communitarian’  character  of  the  procession  to  receive  the  Eucharist.  The  singing  is
prolonged for as long as the Sacrament is being administered to the faithful.74 However,
if there is to be a hymn after Communion, the Communion Chant should be ended in
a timely manner.
Care should be taken that singers, too, can receive Communion with ease.
In the dioceses of England and Wales singing at Communion may be chosen from
87.
among the following: the antiphon from the *Graduale Romanum*, with or without the
Psalm, or the antiphon with Psalm from the *Graduale Simplex*, or some other suitable
liturgical chant approved by the Conference of Bishops of England and Wales. This is
sung either by the choir alone or by the choir or a cantor with the people.
However, if there is no singing, the antiphon given in the Missal may be recited either
by the faithful, or by some of them, or by a reader; otherwise, it is recited by the Priest
himself after he has received Communion and before he distributes Communion to the
faithful.
When the distribution of Communion is over, if appropriate, the Priest and faithful
88.
pray quietly for some time. If desired, a Psalm or other canticle of praise or a hymn may
also be sung by the whole congregation.
To bring to completion the prayer of the People of God, and also to conclude the
89.
whole Communion Rite, the Priest pronounces the Prayer after Communion, in which
he prays for the fruits of the mystery just celebrated.
73
74
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, nos. 31, 32: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *59 (1969),
pp. 558-559; Sacred Congregation for the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Immensae caritatis*, 29 January 1973, no. 2: *Acta 
*
*Apostolicae Sedis* 65 (1973), pp. 267-268.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship, Instruction, *Inestimabile donum*, 3 April 1980, no. 17: *Acta Apostoli-
*
*cae Sedis* 72 (1980), p. 338.
At  Mass  a  single  Prayer  after  Communion  is  said,  and  it  ends  with  the  shorter
conclusion; that is:
•
•
•
if the prayer is directed to the Father:
if it is directed to the Father, but the Son is mentioned at the end:
reigns for ever and ever;
if it is directed to the Son
: Who live and reign for ever and ever.
Through Christ our Lord;
Who lives and
The people make the prayer their own by means of the acclamation Amen.
D.  The Concluding Rites
90.
a.
b.
c.
d.
To the Concluding Rites belong the following:
brief announcements, should they be necessary;
the Priest’s Greeting and Blessing, which on certain days and occasions is expanded
and expressed by the Prayer over the People or another more solemn formula;
the Dismissal of the people by the Deacon or the Priest, so that each may go back
to doing good works, praising and blessing God;
the kissing of the altar by the Priest and the Deacon, followed by a profound bow
to the altar by the Priest, the Deacon, and the other ministers.
22  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
CHAPTER III
**Duties and Ministries in the Mass
**
91.
The celebration of the Eucharist is the action of Christ and of the Church, namely,
of  the  holy  people  united  and  ordered  under  the  Bishop.  It  therefore  pertains  to  the
whole Body of the Church, manifests it, and has its effect upon it. Indeed, it also affects
the individual members of the Church in a different way, according to their different
orders, functions, and actual participation.75 In this way, the Christian people, ‘a chosen
race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for his own possession’, expresses its
cohesion and its hierarchical ordering.76 All, therefore, whether ordained ministers or
lay Christian faithful, in fulfilling their function or their duty, should carry out solely
but totally that which pertains to them.77
I.  THE DUTIES OF THOSE IN HOLy ORDERS
Every legitimate celebration of the Eucharist is directed by the Bishop, either in
92.
person or through Priests who are his helpers.78
When the Bishop is present at a Mass where the people are gathered, it is most fitting
that he himself celebrate the Eucharist and associate Priests with himself in the sacred
action as concelebrants. This is done not for the sake of adding outward solemnity to the
rite, but to signify more vividly the mystery of the Church, ‘the sacrament of unity’.79
If, on the other hand, the Bishop does not celebrate the Eucharist but has assigned it
to someone else to do this, then it is appropriate that he should preside over the Liturgy
of the Word, wearing the pectoral cross, stole, and cope over an alb, and that he should
give the blessing at the end of Mass.80
A Priest, also, who possesses within the Church the sacred power of Orders to
93.
offer  sacrifice  in  the  person  of  Christ,81  presides  by  this  fact  over  the  faithful  people
gathered here and now, presides over their prayer, proclaims to them the message of
salvation, associates the people with himself in the offering of sacrifice through Christ
in  the  Holy  Spirit  to  God  the  Father,  and  gives  his  brothers  and  sisters  the  Bread  of
eternal life and partakes of it with them. Therefore, when he celebrates the Eucharist, he
must serve God and the people with dignity and humility, and by his bearing and by the
way he pronounces the divine words he must convey to the faithful the living presence
of Christ.
After the Priest, the Deacon, in virtue of the sacred Ordination he has received,
94.
holds first place among those who minister in the celebration of the Eucharist. For the
sacred Order of the Diaconate has been held in high honour in the Church even from
the early time of the Apostles.82 At Mass the Deacon has his own part in proclaiming the
Gospel, from time to time in preaching God’s Word, in announcing the intentions of the
Universal Prayer, in ministering to the Priest, in preparing the altar and in serving the
celebration of the Sacrifice, in distributing the Eucharist to the faithful, especially under
the species of wine, and from time to time in giving instructions regarding the people’s
gestures and posture.
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 26.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 14.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 28.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, nos. 26, 28; Constitution on
the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 42.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 26.
 Cf. *Caeremoniale Episcoporum, *editio typica, 1984, nos. 175-186.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, no. 28; Decree on the Ministry
and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 2.
 Cf. Paul vI, Apostolic Letter, *Sacrum Diaconatus Ordinem*, 18 June 1967: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 697-704; Pontificale
Romanum, *De Ordinatione Episcopi, presbyterorum et diaconorum*, editio typica altera, 1989, no. 173.
*Duties and Ministries in the Mass  *23
II.  THE FUNCTIONS OF THE PEOPLE OF GOD
In the celebration of Mass the faithful form a holy people, a people of God’s own
95.
possession and a royal priesthood, so that they may give thanks to God and offer the
unblemished sacrificial victim not only by means of the hands of the Priest but also
together with him and so that they may learn to offer their very selves.83 They should,
moreover, take care to show this by their deep religious sense and their charity toward
brothers and sisters who participate with them in the same celebration.
They are consequently to avoid any appearance of singularity or division, keeping in
mind that they have only one Father in heaven and that hence are all brothers or sisters
one to the other.
Moreover, they are to form one body, whether in hearing the Word of God, or in
96.
taking part in the prayers and in the singing, or above all by the common offering of
the Sacrifice and by participating together at the Lord’s table. This unity is beautifully
apparent from the gestures and bodily postures observed together by the faithful.
97.
The faithful, moreover, should not refuse to serve the People of God in gladness
whenever  they  are  asked  to  perform  some  particular  service  or  function  in  the
celebration.
III.  PARTICULAR MINISTRIES
*The Ministry of the Instituted Acolyte and Lector
*
98.
The acolyte is instituted for service at the altar and to assist the Priest and Deacon.
It is his place principally to prepare the altar and the sacred vessels and, if necessary, to
distribute the Eucharist to the faithful as an extraordinary minister.84
In the ministry of the altar, the acolyte has his own proper functions (cf. nos. 187-
193), which he must carry out in person.
The lector is instituted to proclaim the readings from Sacred Scripture, with the
99.
exception of the Gospel. He may also announce the intentions for the Universal Prayer
and, in the absence of a psalmist, recite the Psalm between the readings.
In the celebration of the Eucharist, the lector has his own proper function (cf. nos.
194-198), which he himself must carry out.
*Other Functions
*
In the absence of an instituted acolyte, there may be deputed lay ministers to serve
100.
at the altar and assist the Priest and the Deacon; these carry the cross, the candles, the
thurible, the bread, the wine, and the water, or who are even deputed to distribute Holy
Communion as extraordinary ministers.85
In the absence of an instituted lector, other lay people may be deputed to proclaim
101.
the  readings  from  Sacred  Scripture,  people  who  are  truly  suited  to  carrying  out  this
function and carefully prepared, so that by their hearing the readings from the sacred
texts the faithful may conceive in their hearts a sweet and living affection for Sacred
Scripture.86
83
84
85
86
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 48; Sacred Congrega-
tion of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 12: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 548-549.
 Cf. *Code of Canon Law*, can. 910 § 2; cf. also the Interdicasterial Instruction on certain questions regarding the collaboration of the
non-ordained faithful in the sacred ministry of Priests, *Ecclesiae de mysterio*, 15 August 1997, art. 8: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 89 (1997), p.
871.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation for the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Immensae caritatis*, 29 January 1973, no. 1: *Acta Apostolicae 
*
*Sedis* 65 (1973), pp. 265-266; *Code of Canon Law*, can. 230 § 3.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 24.
24  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
102.
It is the psalmist’s place to sing the Psalm or other biblical canticle to be found
between the readings. To carry out this function correctly, it is necessary for the psalmist
to be accomplished in the art of singing Psalms and have a facility in public speaking
and elocution.
Among  the  faithful,  the
103.
*schola  cantorum  *or  choir  exercises  its  own  liturgical
function,  its  place  being  to  take  care  that  the  parts  proper  to  it,  in  keeping  with  the
different genres of chant, are properly carried out and to foster the active participation
of the faithful by means of the singing.87 What is said about the *schola cantorum* also
applies, with due regard for the relevant norms, to other musicians, and especially the
organist.
It  is  fitting  that  there  be  a  cantor  or  a  choir  director  to  direct  and  support  the
104.
people’s  singing.  Indeed,  when  there  is  no  choir,  it  is  up  to  the  cantor  to  direct  the
different chants, with the people taking the part proper to them.88
105.
a.
b.
c.
d.
A liturgical function is also exercised by:
The  sacristan,  who  diligently  arranges  the  liturgical  books,  the  vestments  and
other things that are necessary for the celebration of Mass.
The commentator, who, if appropriate, provides the faithful briefly with explanations
and exhortations so as to direct their attention to the celebration and ensure that
they are better disposed for understanding it. The commentator’s remarks should
be thoroughly prepared and notable for their restraint. In performing this function
the commentator stands in a suitable place within sight of the faithful, but not at
the ambo.
Those who take up the collections in the church.
Those who, in some regions, welcome the faithful at the church doors, seat them
appropriately, and marshal them in processions.
It is desirable, at least in cathedrals and in larger churches, to have some competent
106.
minister or master of ceremonies, to see to the appropriate arrangement of sacred actions
and to their being carried out by the sacred ministers and lay faithful with decorum,
order and devotion.
Liturgical  functions  that  are  not  proper  to  the  Priest  or  the  Deacon  and  are
107.
mentioned above (nos. 100-106) may even be entrusted by means of a liturgical blessing
or a temporary deputation to suitable lay persons chosen by the pastor or the rector of
the church.89 As to the function of serving the Priest at the altar, the norms established
by the Bishop for his diocese should be observed.
Iv.  THE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNCTIONS AND
THE PREPARATION OF THE CELEBRATION
One and the same Priest must always exercise the presidential function in all of its
108.
parts, except for those parts which are proper to a Mass at which the Bishop is present
(cf. above no. 92).
If there are several present who are able to exercise the same ministry, nothing
109.
forbids their distributing among themselves and performing different parts of the same
ministry or duty. For example, one Deacon may be assigned to execute the sung parts,
another to serve at the altar; if there are several readings, it is well to distribute them
among a number of readers, and the same applies for other matters. However, it is not
87
88
89
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 19: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 306.
 Cf. *ibidem, *no. 21: pp. 306-307.
 Cf. Pontifical Commission for the Interpretation of Legal Texts, response to *dubium *regarding can. 230 § 2: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 86
(1994), p. 541.
*Duties and Ministries in the Mass  *25
at all appropriate that several persons divide a single element of the celebration among
themselves, e.g., that the same reading be proclaimed by two readers, one after the other,
with the exception of the Passion of the Lord.
If at a Mass with the people only one minister is present, that minister may exercise
110.
several different functions.
There should be harmony and diligence among all those involved in the effective
111.
preparation  of  each  liturgical  celebration  in  accordance  with  the  Missal  and  other
liturgical  books,  both  as  regards  the  rites  and  as  regards  the  pastoral  and  musical
aspects. This should take place under the direction of the rector of the church and after
consultation with the faithful in things that directly pertain to them. However, the Priest
who presides at the celebration always retains the right of arranging those things that
pertain to him.90
90
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 22.
26  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
CHAPTER Iv
**The Different Forms  
**
**of Celebrating Mass
**
In the local Church, first place should certainly be given, because of its significance,
112.
to the Mass at which the Bishop presides, surrounded by his Presbyterate, Deacons, and
lay ministers,91 and in which the holy People of God participate fully and actively, for it
is there that the principal manifestation of the Church is found.
At a Mass celebrated by the Bishop or at which he presides without celebrating the
Eucharist, the norms found in the *Caeremoniale Episcoporum (Ceremonial of Bishops) 
*
should be observed.92
Great importance should also be given to a Mass celebrated with any community,
113.
but  especially  with  the  parish  community,  inasmuch  as  it  represents  the  universal
Church at a given time and place, and chiefly in the common Sunday celebration.93
Moreover,  among  those  Masses  celebrated  by  some  communities,  a  particular
114.
place  belongs  to  the  Conventual  Mass,  which  is  a  part  of  the  daily  Office,  or  the
‘community’ Mass. Although such Masses do not involve any special form of celebration,
it is nevertheless most fitting that they be celebrated with singing, especially with the
full participation of all members of the community, whether of religious or of canons.
Therefore, in these Masses all should exercise their function according to the Order or
ministry they have received. Hence, it is desirable that all the Priests who are not obliged
to celebrate individually for the pastoral benefit of the faithful concelebrate insofar as
possible  at  the  conventual  or  community  Mass.  In  addition,  all  Priests  belonging  to
the community who are obliged, as a matter of duty, to celebrate individually for the
pastoral benefit of the faithful may also on the same day concelebrate at the conventual
or community Mass.94 For it is preferable that Priests who are present at a celebration
of the Eucharist, unless excused for a just reason, should usually exercise the function
proper to their Order and hence take part as concelebrants, wearing sacred vestments.
Otherwise, they wear their proper choir dress or a surplice over a cassock.
I.  MASS WITH THE PEOPLE
By Mass with the people is meant a Mass celebrated with the participation of the
115.
faithful. Moreover, it is appropriate, insofar as possible, and especially on Sundays and
Holydays of Obligation, that the celebration take place with singing and with a suitable
number of ministers.95 It may, however, take place even without singing and with only
one minister.
If at any celebration of Mass a Deacon is present, he should exercise his function.
116.
Furthermore,  it  is  desirable  that  an  acolyte,  a  reader,  and  a  cantor  should  usually  be
there to assist the Priest Celebrant. Indeed, the rite described below foresees an even
greater number of ministers.
91
92
93
94
95
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 41.
 Cf. *Caeremoniale Episcoporum, *editio typica, 1984, nos. 119-186.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 42; Dogmatic Con-
stitution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, no. 28; Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 5; Sacred Con-
gregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 26: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 555.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 47: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p.
565.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 26: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 555;
Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, nos. 16, 27: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), pp. 305, 308.
*Things to Be Prepared
*
The altar is to be covered with at least one white cloth. In addition, on or next to the
117.
altar are to be placed candlesticks with lighted candles: at least two in any celebration,
or even four or six, especially for a Sunday Mass or a Holyday of Obligation, or if the
Diocesan Bishop celebrates, then seven candlesticks with lighted candles. Likewise, on
the altar or close to it, there is to be a cross adorned with a figure of Christ crucified.
The candles and the cross with the figure of Christ crucified may also be carried in the
procession at the Entrance. On the altar itself may be placed a *Book of the Gospels* distinct
from the book of other readings, unless it is carried in the Entrance Procession.
118.
a.
b.
c.
Likewise these should be prepared:
next to the Priest’s chair: the Missal and, if appropriate, a hymnal;
at the ambo: the Lectionary;
on  the  credence  table:  the  chalice,  corporal,  purificator,  and,  if  appropriate,  the
pall; the paten and, if needed, ciboria; bread for the Communion of the Priest who
presides, the Deacon, the ministers, and the people; cruets containing the wine
and the water, unless all of these are presented by the faithful in the procession at
the Offertory; the vessel of water to be blessed, if the sprinkling of holy water takes
place; the Communion-plate for the Communion of the faithful; and whatever is
needed for the washing of hands.
It is a praiseworthy practice for the chalice to be covered with a veil, which may be
either of the colour of the day or white.
119.
In  the  sacristy,  according  to  the  various  forms  of  celebration,  there  should  be
prepared the sacred vestments (cf. nos. 337–341) for the Priest, the Deacon, and other
ministers:
a.
b.
c.
for the Priest: the alb, the stole, and the chasuble;
for  the  Deacon:  the  alb,  the  stole,  and  the  dalmatic;  the  latter  may  be  omitted,
however, either out of necessity or on account of a lesser degree of solemnity;
for the other ministers: albs or other lawfully approved attire.
96
All who wear an alb should use a cincture and an amice unless, due to the form of the
alb, they are not needed.
When  the  Entrance  takes  place  with  a  procession,  the  following  are  also  to  be
prepared:  a  *Book  of  the  Gospels*;  on  Sundays  and  festive  days,  a  thurible  and  incense
boat, if incense is being used; the cross to be carried in procession; and candlesticks
with lighted candles.
A.  Mass without a Deacon
*The Introductory Rites
*
When  the  people  are  gathered,  the  Priest  and  ministers,  wearing  the  sacred
120.
vestments, go in procession to the altar in this order:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
the thurifer carrying a smoking thurible, if incense is being used;
ministers  who  carry  lighted  candles,  and  between  them  an  acolyte  or  other
minister with the cross;
the acolytes and the other ministers;
a reader, who may carry a
elevated;
the Priest who is to celebrate the Mass.
*Book of the Gospels *(though not a Lectionary), slightly
96
 Cf. the Interdicasterial Instruction on certain questions regarding the collaboration of the non-ordained faithful in the sacred ministry
of Priests, *Ecclesiae de mysterio*, 15 August 1997, art. 6: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 89 (1997), p. 869.
28  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
If incense is being used, before the procession begins, the Priest puts some into the
thurible and blesses it with the Sign of the Cross without saying anything.
During the procession to the altar, the Entrance Chant takes place (cf. nos. 47-
121.
48).
122.
When they reach the altar, the Priest and ministers make a profound bow.
The cross adorned with a figure of Christ crucified, and carried in procession, may
be placed next to the altar to serve as the altar cross, in which case it must be the only
cross used; otherwise it is put away in a dignified place. As for the candlesticks, these
are placed on the altar or near it. It is a praiseworthy practice for the *Book of the Gospels 
*
*to *be placed on the altar.
The Priest goes up to the altar and venerates it with a kiss. Then, if appropriate, he
123.
incenses the cross and the altar, walking around the latter.
Once all this has been done, the Priest goes to the chair. When the Entrance Chant
124.
is concluded, with everybody standing, the Priest and faithful sign themselves with the
Sign of the Cross. The Priest says: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit. The people reply, Amen.
Then, facing the people and extending his hands, the Priest greets the people, using
one of the formulae indicated. The Priest himself or some other minister may also very
briefly introduce the faithful to the Mass of the day.
The Penitential Act follows. After this, the
Kyrie is sung or said, in accordance with
125.
the rubrics (cf. no. 52).
For celebrations where it is prescribed, the
126.
*highest) *is either sung or said (cf. no. 53).
Gloria in excelsis* (Glory to God in the 
*
The Priest then calls upon the people to pray, saying, with hands joined,
Let us pray.
127.
All pray silently with the Priest for a brief time. Then the Priest, with hands extended,
says the Collect, at the end of which the people acclaim, Amen.
*The Liturgy of the Word
*
After the Collect, all sit. The Priest may, very briefly, introduce the faithful to the
128.
Liturgy of the Word. Then the reader goes to the ambo and, from the Lectionary already
placed there before Mass, proclaims the First Reading, to which all listen. At the end,
the reader pronounces the acclamation The word of the Lord, and all reply, Thanks be
to God.
Then  a  few  moments  of  silence  may  be  observed,  if  appropriate,  so  that  all  may
meditate on what they have heard.
Then the psalmist or the reader proclaims the verses of the Psalm and the people
129.
make the response as usual.
130.
If there is to be a Second Reading before the Gospel, the reader proclaims it from
the ambo. All listen and at the end reply to the acclamation, as noted above (no. 128).
Then, if appropriate, a few moments of silence may be observed.
After this, all rise, and the
131.
requires (cf. nos. 62–64).
Alleluia or other chant is sung as the liturgical time
During the singing of the
132.
Alleluia or other chant, if incense is being used, the Priest
puts some into the thurible and blesses it. Then, with hands joined, he bows profoundly
before the altar and quietly says the prayer Munda cor meum* (Cleanse my heart).
*
If the Book of the Gospels
133.
 is on the altar, the Priest then takes it and approaches
the ambo, carrying the Book of the Gospels slightly elevated. He is preceded by the lay
ministers, who may carry the thurible and the candles. Those present turn towards the
ambo as a sign of special reverence for the Gospel of Christ.
At the ambo, the Priest opens the book and, with hands joined, says,
134.
The Lord
be with you, to which the people reply, And with your spirit. Then he says, A reading
from the holy Gospel, making the Sign of the Cross with his thumb on the book and on
his forehead, mouth, and breast, which everyone else does as well. The people acclaim,
Glory to you, O Lord. The Priest incenses the book, if incense is being used (cf. nos.
276-277). Then he proclaims the Gospel and at the end pronounces the acclamation
The Gospel of the Lord, to which all reply, Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. The Priest
kisses the book, saying quietly the formula Per evangelica dicta* (Through the words of 
*
*the Gospel).
*
135.
If no reader is present, the Priest himself proclaims all the readings and the Psalm,
standing at the ambo. If incense is being used, he puts some incense into the thurible at
the ambo, blesses it, and, bowing profoundly, says the prayer Munda cor meum* (Cleanse 
*
*my heart).
*
The Priest, standing at the chair or at the ambo itself or, if appropriate, in another
136.
worthy place, gives the Homily. When the Homily is over, a period of silence may be
observed.
The  Symbol  or  Creed  is  sung  or  recited  by  the  Priest  together  with  the  people
137.
(cf.  no.  68)  with  everyone  standing.  At  the  words  et  incarnatus  est,*  etc.  (and  by  the 
*
*Holy Spirit…and became man) *all make a profound bow; but on the Solemnities of the
Annunciation and of the Nativity of the Lord, all genuflect.
After the recitation of the Symbol or Creed, the Priest, standing at the chair with
138.
his hands joined, by means of a brief address calls upon the faithful to participate in
the  Universal  Prayer.  Then  the  cantor,  the  reader,  or  another  person  announces  the
intentions from the ambo or from some other suitable place while facing the people.
The latter take their part by replying in supplication. At the very end, the Priest, with
hands extended, concludes the petitions with a prayer.
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*
When the Universal Prayer is over, all sit, and the Offertory Chant begins (cf. no.
139.
74).
An acolyte or other lay minister places the corporal, the purificator, the chalice, the
pall, and the Missal on the altar.
It  is  desirable  that  the  participation  of  the  faithful  be  expressed  by  an  offering,
140.
whether of bread and wine for the celebration of the Eucharist or of other gifts to relieve
the needs of the Church and of the poor.
The offerings of the faithful are received by the Priest, assisted by the acolyte or other
minister. The bread and wine for the Eucharist are carried to the Celebrant, who places
them on the altar, while other gifts are put in another suitable place (cf. no. 73).
The  Priest  accepts  the  paten  with  the  bread  at  the  altar,  holds  it  slightly  raised
141.
above the altar with both hands and says quietly, Benedictus es, Domine* (Blessed are 
*
*you, Lord God). *Then he places the paten with the bread on the corporal.
After this, as the minister presents the cruets, the Priest stands at the side of the
142.
altar and pours wine and a little water into the chalice, saying quietly, Per huius aquae
*(By the mystery of this water)*. He returns to the middle of the altar and with both hands
raises the chalice a little, and says quietly, Benedictus es, Domine* (Blessed are you, Lord 
*
*God). *Then he places the chalice on the corporal and, if appropriate, covers it with a
pall.
30  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
If, however, there is no Offertory Chant and the organ is not played, in the presentation
of the bread and wine the Priest may say the formulae of blessing aloud and the people
acclaim, Blessed be God for ever.
After placing the chalice on the altar, the Priest bows profoundly and says quietly,
143.
In spiritu humilitatis* (With humble spirit*).
If incense is being used, the Priest then puts some in the thurible, blesses it without
144.
saying anything, and incenses the offerings, the cross, and the altar. While standing at
the side of the altar, a minister incenses the Priest and then the people.
After the prayer
145.
In spiritu humilitatis* (With humble spirit) *or after the incensation,
the Priest washes his hands standing at the side of the altar and, as the minister pours
the water, says quietly, Lava me, Domine* (Wash me, O Lord).
*
Returning to the middle of the altar, and standing facing the people, the Priest
146.
extends  and  then  joins  his  hands,  and  calls  upon  the  people  to  pray,  saying,  Orate,
fratres* (Pray, brethren). *The people rise and make the response May the Lord accept the
sacrifice*, etc. *Then the Priest, with hands extended, says the Prayer over the Offerings.
At the end the people acclaim, Amen.
Then  the  Priest  begins  the  Eucharistic  Prayer.  In  accordance  with  the  rubrics
147.
(cf.  no.  365),  he  selects  a  Eucharistic  Prayer  from  those  found  in  the  Roman  Missal
or  approved  by  the  Apostolic  See.  By  its  very  nature,  the  Eucharistic  Prayer  requires
that only the Priest say it, in virtue of his Ordination. The people, for their part, should
associate  themselves  with  the  Priest  in  faith  and  in  silence,  as  well  as  by  means  of
their interventions as prescribed in the course of the Eucharistic Prayer: namely, the
responses in the Preface dialogue, the Sanctus* (Holy, Holy, Holy)*, the acclamation after
the Consecration, the acclamation Amen after the concluding doxology, as well as other
acclamations  approved  by  the  Conference  of  Bishops  with  the  *recognitio  *of  the  Holy
See.
It is most appropriate that the Priest sing those parts of the Eucharistic Prayer for
which musical notation is provided.
148.
As he begins the Eucharistic Prayer, the Priest extends his hands and sings or says,
The Lord be with you. The people reply, And with your spirit. As he continues, saying,
Lift up your hearts, he raises his hands. The people reply, We lift them up to the Lord.
Then the Priest, with hands extended, adds, Let us give thanks to the Lord our God,
and  the  people  reply,  It  is  right  and  just.  After  this,  the  Priest,  with  hands  extended,
continues the Preface. At its conclusion, he joins his hands and, together with all those
present, sings or says aloud the Sanctus* (Holy, Holy, Holy) *(cf. no. 79 b).
The Priest continues the Eucharistic Prayer in accordance with the rubrics that are
149.
set out in each of the Prayers.
If the celebrant is a Bishop, in the Prayers, after the words N., our Pope, he adds,
and me, your unworthy servant. If, however, the Bishop is celebrating outside his own
diocese, after the words with . . . N., our Pope, he adds, my brother N., the Bishop of this
Church, and me, your unworthy servant; or after the words especially . . . N., our Pope,
he adds, my brother N., the Bishop of this Church, and me, your unworthy servant.
The Diocesan Bishop, or one who is equivalent to the Diocesan Bishop in law, must
be mentioned by means of this formula: together with your servant N., our Pope, and
N., our Bishop* (or *vicar, Prelate, Prefect, Abbot*).
*
It is permitted to mention Coadjutor Bishop and Auxiliary Bishops in the Eucharistic
Prayer,  but  not  other  Bishops  who  happen  to  be  present.  When  several  are  to  be
mentioned, this is done with the collective formula: N., our Bishop and his assistant
Bishops.
In each of the Eucharistic Prayers, these formulae are to be adapted according to the
requirements of grammar.
A  little  before  the  Consecration,  if  appropriate,  a  minister  rings  a  small  bell  as
150.
a signal to the faithful. The minister also rings the small bell at each elevation by the
Priest, according to local custom.
If incense is being used, when the host and the chalice are shown to the people after
the Consecration, a minister incenses them.
After the Consecration when the Priest has said,
151.
pronounce the acclamation, using one of the prescribed formulae.
The mystery of faith, the people
At the end of the Eucharistic Prayer, the Priest takes the paten with the host and the
chalice and elevates them both while pronouncing alone the doxology Through him. At
the end the people acclaim, Amen. After this, the Priest places the paten and the chalice
on the corporal.
After the Eucharistic Prayer is concluded, the Priest, with hands joined, says alone
152.
the introduction to the Lord’s Prayer, and then with hands extended, he pronounces the
prayer together with the people.
After the Lord’s Prayer is concluded, the Priest, with hands extended, says alone
153.
the  embolism  Libera  nos  (*Deliver  us,  Lord).  *At  the  end,  the  people  acclaim,  For  the
kingdom.
Then the Priest, with hands extended, says aloud the prayer
154.
Domine Iesu Christe,
qui  dixisti  (*Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  said  to  your  Apostles)  *and  when  it  is  concluded,
extending and then joining his hands, he announces the greeting of peace, facing the
people and saying, The peace of the Lord be with you always. The people reply, And
with your spirit. After this, if appropriate, the Priest adds, Let us offer each other the
sign of peace.
The  Priest  may  give  the  Sign  of  Peace  to  the  ministers  but  always  remains  within
the  sanctuary,  so  that  the  celebration  is  not  disrupted.  He  may  do  the  same  if,  for  a
reasonable cause, he wishes to offer the Sign of Peace to a small number of the faithful.
According to what is decided by the Conference of Bishops, all express to one another
peace, communion, and charity. While the Sign of Peace is being given, it is permissible
to say, The peace of the Lord be with you always, to which the reply is Amen.
155.
After this, the Priest takes the host, breaks it over the paten, and places a small
piece in the chalice, saying quietly, Haec commixtio (*May this mingling). *Meanwhile the
Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God) *is sung or said by the choir and by the people (cf. no. 83).
Then the Priest, with hands joined, says quietly the prayer for Communion, either
156.
Domine Iesu Christe, Fili Dei vivi (*Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God) *or Perceptio
Corporis et Sanguinis tui (*May the receiving of your Body and Blood).
*
When the prayer is concluded, the Priest genuflects, takes a host consecrated at
157.
the  same  Mass,  and,  holding  it  slightly  raised  above  the  paten  or  above  the  chalice,
facing the people, says, Ecce Agnus Dei (*Behold the Lamb of God) and together w*ith the
people he adds, Lord, I am not worthy.
After this, standing facing the altar, the Priest says quietly,
Corpus Christi custodiat
158.
me in vitam aeternam (*May the Body of Christ keep me safe for eternal life), *and reverently
consumes the Body of Christ. Then he takes the chalice, saying quietly, Sanguis Christi
32  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
custodiat me in vitam aeternam (*May the Blood of Christ keep me safe for eternal life), 
*
and reverently partakes of the Blood of Christ.
While the Priest is receiving the Sacrament, the Communion Chant begins (cf.
159.
no. 86).
The Priest then takes the paten or ciborium and approaches the communicants,
160.
who usually come up in procession.
It is not permitted for the faithful to take the consecrated Bread or the sacred chalice
by themselves and, still less, to hand them on from one to another among themselves. In
the dioceses of England and Wales Holy Communion is to be received standing, though
individual members of the faithful may choose to receive Communion while kneeling.
However, when they communicate standing, it is recommended that the faithful bow in
reverence before receiving the Sacrament.
If Communion is given only under the species of bread, the Priest raises the host
161.
slightly  and  shows  it  to  each,  saying,  The  Body  of  Christ.  The  communicant  replies,
Amen, and receives the Sacrament either on the tongue or, where this is allowed, in the
hand, the choice lying with the communicant. As soon as the communicant receives the
host, he or she consumes the whole of it.
If, however, Communion is given under both kinds, the rite prescribed in nos. 284-
287 is to be followed.
In the distribution of Communion the Priest may be assisted by other Priests who
162.
happen to be present. If such Priests are not present and there is a truly large number
of communicants, the Priest may call upon extraordinary ministers to assist him, that
is, duly instituted acolytes or even other faithful who have been duly deputed for this
purpose.97  In  case  of  necessity,  the  Priest  may  depute  suitable  faithful  for  this  single
occasion.98
These  ministers  should  not  approach  the  altar  before  the  Priest  has  received
Communion,  and  they  are  always  to  receive  from  the  hands  of  the  Priest  Celebrant
the  vessel  containing  the  species  of  the  Most  Holy  Eucharist  for  distribution  to  the
faithful.
When the distribution of Communion is over, the Priest himself immediately and
163.
completely consumes at the altar any consecrated wine that happens to remain; as for
any consecrated hosts that are left, he either consumes them at the altar or carries them
to the place designated for the reservation of the Eucharist.
Upon  returning  to  the  altar,  the  Priest  collects  the  fragments,  should  any  remain,
and he stands at the altar or at the credence table and purifies the paten or ciborium
over the chalice, and after this purifies the chalice, saying quietly the formula Quod ore
sumpsimus, Domine (*What has passed our lips), *and dries the chalice with a purificator.
If the vessels are purified at the altar, they are carried to the credence table by a minister.
Nevertheless, it is also permitted to leave vessels needing to be purified, especially if
there are several, on a corporal, suitably covered, either on the altar or on the credence
table, and to purify them immediately after Mass, after the Dismissal of the people.
After this, the Priest may return to the chair. A sacred silence may now be observed
164.
for some time, or a Psalm or other canticle of praise or a hymn may be sung (cf. no.
88).
Then, standing at the chair or at the altar, and facing the people with hands joined,
165.
the  Priest  says,  Let  us  pray;  then,  with  hands  extended,  he  recites  the  Prayer  after
97
98
 Cf. Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments and Divine Worship, Instruction, *Inaestimabile donum*, 3 April 1980, no. 10: *Acta Apostoli-
*
*cae Sedis* 72 (1980), p. 336; Interdicasterial Instruction on certain questions regarding the collaboration of the non-ordained faithful in
the sacred ministry of Priests, *Ecclesiae de mysterio*, 15 August 1997, art. 8: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 89 (1997), p. 871.
 Cf. Roman Missal, Appendix III, Rite of Deputing a Minister to Distribute Holy Communion on a Single Occasion.
Communion.  A  brief  period  of  silence  may  precede  the  prayer,  unless  this  has  been
already observed immediately after Communion. At the end of the prayer the people
acclaim, Amen.
*The Concluding Rites
*
When the Prayer after Communion is concluded, brief announcements should be
166.
made to the people, if there are any.
Then the Priest, extending his hands, greets the people, saying,
The Lord be with
167.
you.  They  reply,  And  with  your  spirit.  The  Priest,  joining  his  hands  again  and  then
immediately  placing  his  left hand  on  his breast,  raises his  right  hand  and  adds,  May
almighty  God  bless  you  and,  as  he  makes  the  Sign  of  the  Cross  over  the  people,  he
continues, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. All reply, Amen.
On  certain  days  and  occasions  this  blessing,  in  accordance  with  the  rubrics,  is
expanded and expressed by a Prayer over the People or another more solemn formula.
A Bishop blesses the people with the appropriate formula, making the Sign of the
Cross three times over the people.99
Immediately after the Blessing, with hands joined, the Priest adds,
168.
(*Go forth, the Mass is ended)* and all reply, Thanks be to God.
Ite, missa est
Then the Priest venerates the altar as usual with a kiss and, after making a profound
169.
bow with the lay ministers, he withdraws with them.
If, however, another liturgical action follows the Mass, the Concluding Rites, that
170.
is, the Greeting, the Blessing, and the Dismissal, are omitted.
B.  Mass with a Deacon
When he is present at the celebration of the Eucharist, a Deacon should exercise
171.
his ministry, wearing sacred vestments. In fact, the Deacon:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
assists the Priest and walks at his side;
ministers at the altar, both as regards the chalice and the book;
proclaims the Gospel and may, at the direction of the Priest Celebrant, give the
Homily (cf. no. 66);
guides the faithful people by giving appropriate instructions, and announces the
intentions of the Universal Prayer;
assists the Priest Celebrant in distributing Communion, and purifies and arranges
the sacred vessels;
carries out the duties of other ministers himself, if necessary, when none of them
is present.
*The Introductory Rites
*
Carrying the Book of the Gospels slightly elevated, the Deacon precedes the Priest
172.
as he approaches the altar or else walks at the Priest’s side.
When he reaches the altar, if he is carrying the Book of the Gospels, he omits the
173.
sign of reverence and goes up to the altar. It is a praiseworthy practice for him to place
the Book of the Gospels on the altar, after which, together with the Priest, he venerates
the altar with a kiss.
If, however, he is not carrying the Book of the Gospels, he makes a profound bow to
the altar with the Priest in the customary way and with him venerates the altar with a
kiss.
99
 Cf. *Caeremoniale Episcoporum, *editio typica, 1984, nos. 1118-1121.
34  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
Lastly, if incense is being used, he assists the Priest in putting some into the thurible
and in incensing the cross and the altar.
Once the altar has been incensed, the Deacon goes to the chair together with the
174.
Priest and there stands at the Priest’s side and assists him as necessary.
*The Liturgy of the Word
*
During  the  singing  of  the
175.
Alleluia  or  other  chant,  if  incense  is  being  used,  the
Deacon  ministers  to  the  Priest  as  he  puts  incense  into  the  thurible.  Then,  bowing
profoundly  before  the  Priest,  he  asks  for  the  blessing,  saying  in  a  low  voice,  your
blessing,  Father.  The  Priest  blesses  him,  saying,  May  the  Lord  be  in  your  heart.  The
Deacon signs himself with the Sign of the Cross and replies, Amen. Having bowed to
the altar, he then takes up the Book of the Gospels which was placed on it and proceeds
to the ambo, carrying the book slightly elevated. He is preceded by a thurifer carrying a
smoking thurible and by ministers with lighted candles. At the ambo the Deacon greets
the people, with hands joined, saying, The Lord be with you. After this, at the words A
reading from the holy Gospel, he signs with his thumb the book and then himself on his
forehead, mouth, and breast. He incenses the book and proclaims the Gospel reading.
When this is done, he acclaims, The Gospel of the Lord, and all reply, Praise to you,
Lord Jesus Christ. He then venerates the book with a kiss, saying quietly the formula Per
evangelica dicta (*Through the words of the Gospel), *and returns to the Priest’s side.
When the Deacon is assisting the Bishop, he carries the book to him to be kissed, or
else kisses it himself, saying quietly the formula Per evangelica dicta* (Through the words 
*
*of the Gospel). *In more solemn celebrations, if appropriate, the Bishop may impart a
blessing to the people with the Book of the Gospels.
Lastly, the Deacon may carry the Book of the Gospels to the credence table or to
another suitable and dignified place.
Moreover, if there is no other suitable reader present, the Deacon should proclaim
176.
the other readings as well.
After the introduction by the Priest, it is the Deacon himself who announces the
177.
intentions of the Universal Prayer, usually from the ambo.
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*
178.
After  the  Universal  Prayer,  while  the  Priest  remains  at  the  chair,  the  Deacon
prepares the altar, assisted by the acolyte, but it is the Deacon’s place to take care of the
sacred vessels himself. He also assists the Priest in receiving the people’s gifts. After this,
he hands the Priest the paten with the bread to be consecrated, pours wine and a little
water into the chalice, saying quietly, By the mystery of this water, *etc. *and after this
presents the chalice to the Priest. He may also carry out the preparation of the chalice
at the credence table. If incense is being used, the Deacon assists the Priest during the
incensation of the offerings, the cross, and the altar; and after this the Deacon himself
or the acolyte incenses the Priest and the people.
During  the  Eucharistic  Prayer,  the  Deacon  stands  near  the  Priest,  but  slightly
179.
behind  him,  so  that  when  necessary  he  may  assist  the  Priest  with  the  chalice  or  the
Missal.
From  the  epiclesis  until  the  Priest  shows  the  chalice,  the  Deacon  usually  remains
kneeling. If several Deacons are present, one of them may place incense in the thurible
for the Consecration and incense the host and the chalice at the elevation.
180.
At the concluding doxology of the Eucharistic Prayer, the Deacon stands next to
the Priest, and holds the chalice elevated while the Priest elevates the paten with the
host, until the people have acclaimed, Amen.
After the Priest has said the prayer for the Rite of Peace and the greeting
The peace
181.
of the Lord be with you always and the people have replied, And with your spirit, the
Deacon, if appropriate, says the invitation to the Sign of Peace. With hands joined, he
faces the people and says, Let us offer each other the sign of peace. Then he himself
receives the Sign of Peace from the Priest and may offer it to those other ministers who
are nearest to him.
After the Priest’s Communion, the Deacon receives Communion under both kinds
182.
from the Priest himself and then assists the Priest in distributing Communion to the
people. If Communion is given under both kinds, the Deacon himself administers the
chalice to the communicants; and, when the distribution is over, standing at the altar, he
immediately and reverently consumes all of the Blood of Christ that remains, assisted, if
the case requires, by other Deacons and Priests.
When the distribution of Communion is over, the Deacon returns to the altar with
183.
the Priest, collects the fragments, should any remain, and then carries the chalice and
other sacred vessels to the credence table, where he purifies them and arranges them
as usual, while the Priest returns to the chair. Nevertheless, it is also permitted to leave
vessels needing to be purified on a corporal, suitably covered, on the credence table, and
to purify them immediately after Mass, following the Dismissal of the people.
*The Concluding Rites
*
Once  the  Prayer  after  Communion  has  been  said,  the  Deacon  makes  brief
184.
announcements to the people, if indeed any need to be made, unless the Priest prefers
to do this himself.
If a Prayer over the People or a formula of Solemn Blessing is used, the Deacon
185.
says,  Bow  down  for  the  blessing.  After  the  Priest’s  blessing,  the  Deacon,  with  hands
joined and facing the people, dismisses the people, saying, Ite, missa est (*Go forth, the 
*
*Mass is ended).
*
Then, together with the Priest, the Deacon venerates the altar with a kiss, makes a
186.
profound bow, and withdraws in a manner similar to the Entrance Procession.
C.  The Functions of the Acolyte
The functions that the acolyte may carry out are of various kinds and several may
187.
occur at the same moment. Hence, it is desirable that these duties be suitably distributed
among several acolytes. If, in fact, only one acolyte is present, he should perform the
more important duties while the rest are to be distributed among several ministers.
*The Introductory Rites
*
In the procession to the altar, the acolyte may carry the cross, walking between
188.
two ministers with lighted candles. Upon reaching the altar, however, the acolyte places
the cross upright near the altar so that it may serve as the altar cross; otherwise, he puts
it away in a dignified place. Then he takes his place in the sanctuary.
Through the entire celebration, it is for the acolyte to approach the Priest or the
189.
Deacon, whenever necessary, in order to present the book to them and to assist them
in any other way required. Thus it is appropriate that, insofar as possible, the acolyte
should occupy a place from which he can easily carry out his ministry either at the chair
or at the altar.
36  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*
In the absence of a Deacon, after the Universal Prayer and while the Priest remains
190.
at the chair, the acolyte places the corporal, the purificator, the chalice, the pall, and the
Missal on the altar. Then, if necessary, the acolyte assists the Priest in receiving the gifts
of the people and, if appropriate, brings the bread and wine to the altar and hands them
to the Priest. If incense is being used, the acolyte presents the thurible to the Priest and
assists him while he incenses the offerings, the cross, and the altar. Then the acolyte
incenses the Priest and the people.
A  duly  instituted  acolyte,  as  an  extraordinary  minister,  may,  if  necessary,  assist
191.
the Priest in distributing Communion to the people.100 If Communion is given under
both  kinds,  in  the  absence  of  a  Deacon,  the  acolyte  administers  the  chalice  to  the
communicants or holds the chalice if Communion is given by intinction.
Likewise, after the distribution of Communion is complete, a duly instituted acolyte
192.
helps the Priest or Deacon to purify and arrange the sacred vessels. In the absence of
a Deacon, a duly instituted acolyte carries the sacred vessels to the credence table and
there purifies them, wipes them and arranges them as usual.
After the celebration of Mass, the acolyte and other ministers return together with
193.
the Deacon and the Priest in procession to the sacristy, in the same manner and in the
same order in which they entered.
D.  The Functions of the Reader
*Introductory Rites
*
In  the  procession  to  the  altar,  in  the  absence  of  a  Deacon,  the  reader,  wearing
194.
approved attire, may carry the Book of the Gospels, slightly elevated. In that case, the
reader walks in front of the Priest but otherwise walks along with the other ministers.
Upon reaching the altar, the reader makes a profound bow with the others. If he
195.
is carrying the Book of the Gospels, he approaches the altar and places the *Book of the 
*
*Gospels *upon it. Then the reader takes his own place in the sanctuary with the other
ministers.
*The Liturgy of the Word
*
196.
The  reader  reads  from  the  ambo  the  readings  that  precede  the  Gospel.  In  the
absence of a psalmist, the reader may also proclaim the Responsorial Psalm after the
First Reading.
In the absence of a Deacon, the reader, after the introduction by the Priest, may
197.
announce the intentions of the Universal Prayer from the ambo.
If there is no singing at the Entrance or at Communion and the antiphons given
198.
in the Missal are not recited by the faithful, the reader may read them at an appropriate
time (cf. nos. 48, 87).
II.  CONCELEBRATED MASS
199.
Concelebration, by which the unity of the Priesthood, of the Sacrifice, and also of
the whole People of God is appropriately expressed, is prescribed by the rite itself for
the Ordination of a Bishop and of Priests, at the Blessing of an Abbot, and at the Chrism
Mass.
It is recommended, moreover, unless the good of the Christian faithful requires or
suggests otherwise, at:
100
 Paul vI, Apostolic Letter, *Ministeria quaedam*, 15 August 1972: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 64 (1972), p. 532.
a.
b.
c.
d.
the Evening Mass of the Lord’s Supper;
the Mass during Councils, gatherings of Bishops, and Synods;
the Conventual Mass and the principal Mass in churches and oratories;
101
Masses at any kind of gathering of Priests, either secular or religious.
Every Priest, however, is allowed to celebrate the Eucharist individually, though not
at  the  same  time  as  a  concelebration  is  taking  place  in  the  same  church  or  oratory.
However, on Holy Thursday, and for the Mass of the Easter vigil, it is not permitted to
celebrate Mass individually.
visiting  Priests  should  be  gladly  admitted  to  concelebration  of  the  Eucharist,
200.
provided their priestly standing has been ascertained.
201.
When there is a large number of Priests, concelebration may take place even several
times on the same day, where necessity or pastoral advantage commend it. However,
this must be done at different times or in distinct sacred places.102
It is for the Bishop, in accordance with the norm of law, to regulate the discipline
202.
for concelebration in all churches and oratories of his diocese.
To be held in particularly high regard is that concelebration in which the Priests of
203.
any given diocese concelebrate with their own Bishop at a stational Mass, especially on
the more solemn days of the liturgical year, at the Ordination Mass of a new Bishop of
the diocese or of his Coadjutor or Auxiliary, at the Chrism Mass, at the Evening Mass of
the Lord’s Supper, at celebrations of the Founder Saint of a local Church or the Patron
of the diocese, on anniversaries of the Bishop, and, lastly, on the occasion of a Synod or
a pastoral visitation.
In the same way, concelebration is recommended whenever Priests gather together
with their own Bishop whether on the occasion of a retreat or at any other gathering.
In these cases the sign of the unity of the priesthood and also of the Church inherent in
every concelebration is made more clearly manifest.103
For a particular reason, having to do either with the significance of the rite or of
204.
the festivity, the faculty is given to celebrate or concelebrate more than once on the same
day in the following cases:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
a Priest who has celebrated or concelebrated the Chrism Mass on Thursday of Holy
Week may also celebrate or concelebrate the Evening Mass of the Lord’s Supper;
a  Priest  who  has  celebrated  or  concelebrated  the  Mass  of  the  Easter  vigil  may
celebrate or concelebrate Mass during the day on Easter Sunday;
on the Nativity of the Lord (Christmas Day), all Priests may celebrate or concelebrate
three Masses, provided the Masses are celebrated at their proper times of day;
on the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed (All Souls’ Day), all Priests
may celebrate or concelebrate three Masses, provided that the celebrations take
place at different times, and with due regard for what has been laid down regarding
the application of second and third Masses;104
a Priest who concelebrates with the Bishop or his delegate at a Synod or pastoral
visitation, or concelebrates on the occasion of a gathering of Priests, may celebrate
Mass again for the benefit of the faithful. This holds also, with due regard for the
prescriptions of law, for groups of religious.
101
102
103
104
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 57; *Code of Canon 
*
*Law*, can. 902.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 47: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p.
566.
 Cf. *ibidem, *no. 47: p. 565.
 Cf. Benedict Xv, Apostolic Constitution, *Incruentum altaris sacrificium*, 10 August 1915: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 7 (1915), pp. 401-404.
38  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
205.
A  concelebrated  Mass,  whatever  its  form,  is  arranged  in  accordance  with  the
norms commonly in force (cf. nos. 112–198), observing or adapting however what is
set out below.
No one is ever to join a concelebration or to be admitted as a concelebrant once
206.
the Mass has already begun.
207.
a.
b.
In the sanctuary there should be prepared:
seats and texts for the concelebrating Priests;
on the credence table: a chalice of sufficient size or else several chalices.
If a Deacon is not present, the functions proper to him are to be carried out by
208.
some of the concelebrants.
If other ministers are also absent, their proper parts may be entrusted to other suitable
faithful laypeople; otherwise, they are carried out by some of the concelebrants.
The concelebrants put on in the vesting room, or other suitable place, the sacred
209.
vestments they customarily wear when celebrating Mass individually. However, should
a  just  cause  arise  (e.g.,  a  more  considerable  number  of  concelebrants  or  a  lack  of
vestments), concelebrants other than the principal celebrant may omit the chasuble and
simply wear the stole over the alb.
*The Introductory Rites
*
When  everything  has  been  properly  arranged,  the  procession  moves  as  usual
210.
through the church to the altar. The concelebrating Priests walk ahead of the principal
celebrant.
On arriving at the altar, the concelebrants and the principal celebrant, after making
211.
a profound bow, venerate the altar with a kiss, then go to their designated seats. As for
the principal celebrant, if appropriate, he incenses the cross and the altar and then goes
to the chair.
*The Liturgy of the Word
*
During the Liturgy of the Word, the concelebrants remain at their places, sitting
212.
or standing whenever the principal celebrant does.
When the Alleluia is begun, all rise, except for a Bishop, who puts incense into the
thurible without saying anything and blesses the Deacon or, in the absence of a Deacon,
the concelebrant who is to proclaim the Gospel. However, in a concelebration where a
Priest presides, the concelebrant who in the absence of a Deacon proclaims the Gospel
neither requests nor receives the blessing of the principal celebrant.
The  Homily  is  usually  given  by  the  principal  celebrant  or  by  one  of  the
213.
concelebrants.
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*
The  Preparation  of  the  Gifts  (cf.  nos.  139-146)  is  carried  out  by  the  principal
214.
celebrant, while the other concelebrants remain at their places.
215.
After the Prayer over the Offerings has been said by the principal celebrant, the
concelebrants approach the altar and stand around it, but in such a way that they do not
obstruct the execution of the rites and that the sacred action may be seen clearly by the
faithful. Nor should they obstruct the Deacon whenever he needs to approach the altar
by reason of his ministry.
The Deacon exercises his ministry near the altar, assisting whenever necessary with
the chalice and the Missal. However, insofar as possible, he stands back slightly, behind
the concelebrating Priests standing around the principal celebrant.
*The Manner of Pronouncing the Eucharistic Prayer
*
The Preface is sung or said by the principal Priest Celebrant alone; but the
216.
Sanctus
*(Holy, Holy, Holy) *is sung or recited by all the concelebrants, together with the people
and the choir.
After  the
217.
Sanctus*  (Holy,  Holy,  Holy),*  the  concelebrating  Priests  continue  the
Eucharistic Prayer in the way described below. Only the principal celebrant makes the
gestures, unless other indications are given.
The parts pronounced by all the concelebrants together and especially the words
218.
of Consecration, which all are obliged to say, are to be recited in such a manner that the
concelebrants speak them in a low voice and that the principal celebrant’s voice is heard
clearly. In this way the words can be more easily understood by the people.
It is a praiseworthy practice for the parts that are to be said by all the concelebrants
together and for which musical notation is provided in the Missal to be sung.
*Eucharistic Prayer I, or the Roman Canon
*
In Eucharistic Prayer I, or the Roman Canon, the
219.
*merciful Father) *is said by the principal celebrant alone, with hands extended.
Te igitur* (To you, therefore, most 
*
It  is  appropriate  that  the  commemoration  (
*Memento*)  of  the  living  and  the
220.
Communicantes*  (In  communion  with  those)  *be  assigned  to  one  or  other  of  the
concelebrating Priests, who then pronounces these prayers alone, with hands extended,
and in a loud voice.
The
221.
celebrant alone, with hands extended.
Hanc  igitur*  (Therefore,  Lord,  we  pray)  *is  said  once  again  by  the  principal
a.
b.
From the
Qui  pridie*  (On  the  day  before  he  was  to  suffer)  *and  the  Simili  modo*  (In  a 
*
Quam oblationem* (Be pleased, O God, we pray) *with hands extended toward
222.
Quam oblationem* (Be pleased, O God, we pray), *up to and including the
Supplices* (In humble prayer we ask you, almighty God), *the principal celebrant alone
makes the gestures, while all the concelebrants pronounce everything together, in this
manner:
the
the offerings;
the
*similar way) *with hands joined;
the words of the Lord, with each extending his right hand toward the bread and
toward the chalice, if this seems appropriate; and at the elevation looking toward
them and after this bowing profoundly;
the
Supra quae* (Be pleased to look upon) *with hands extended;
for the
Supplices* (In humble prayer we ask you, almighty God) *up to and including
the words through this participation at the altar, bowing with hands joined; then
standing upright and crossing themselves at the words may be filled with every
grace and heavenly blessing.
Unde et memores* (Therefore, O Lord, as we celebrate the memorial) *and the
d.
c.
e.
It is appropriate that the commemoration (
223.
*Memento*) of the dead and the Nobis
quoque  peccatoribus*  (To  us,  also,  your  servants)  be*  assigned  to  one  or  other  of  the
concelebrants, who pronounces them alone, with hands extended, and in a loud voice.
40  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
At the words
224.
peccatoribus, all the concelebrants strike their breast.
To us, also, your servants, who though sinners, of the Nobis quoque
The
225.
celebrant alone.
Per quem haec omnia* (Through whom you continue) *is said by the principal
*Eucharistic Prayer II
*
In Eucharistic Prayer II, the part
226.
the principal celebrant alone, with hands extended.
you are indeed Holy, O Lord is pronounced by
In the parts from
227.
all the concelebrants pronounce everything together as follows:
Make holy, therefore, these gifts to the end of Humbly we pray,
a.
b.
c.
d.
At the time he was betrayed and In a similar way with hands joined;
Make  holy,  therefore,  these  gifts,  with  hands  extended  toward  the
the  part
offerings;
the parts
the words of the Lord, with each extending his right hand toward the bread and
toward the chalice, if this seems appropriate; and at the elevation looking toward
them and after this bowing profoundly;
the parts
Therefore, as we celebrate and Humbly we pray with hands extended.
It  is  appropriate  that  the  intercessions  for  the  living,
Remember,  Lord,  your
228.
Church, and *for the dead, *Remember also our brothers and sisters, be assigned to one
or other of the concelebrants, who pronounces them alone, with hands extended, and
in a loud voice.
*Eucharistic Prayer III
*
In Eucharistic Prayer III, the part
229.
the principal celebrant alone, with hands extended.
you are indeed Holy, O Lord is pronounced by
In the parts from
230.
Therefore, O Lord, we humbly implore you to the end of Look,
we  pray  upon  the  oblation,  all  the  concelebrants  pronounce  everything  together  as
follows:
a.
b.
c.
d.
For  on  the  night  he  was  betrayed  and  In  a  similar  way  with  hands
Therefore, O Lord, we humbly implore you with hands extended toward
the part
the offerings;
the  parts
joined;
the words of the Lord, with each extending his right hand toward the bread and
toward the chalice, if this seems appropriate; and at the elevation looking toward
them and after this bowing profoundly;
the parts
the oblation with hands extended.
Therefore, O Lord, as we celebrate the memorial and Look, we pray, upon
It is appropriate that the intercessions
May he make of us an eternal offering to
231.
you,*  and  *May  this  Sacrifice  of  our  reconciliation,  and  To  our  departed  brothers  and
sisters be assigned to one or other of the concelebrants, who pronounces them alone,
with hands extended, and in a loud voice.
*Eucharistic Prayer IV
*
In Eucharistic Prayer Iv, the part
232.
We give you praise, Father most holy up to and
including the words he might sanctify creation to the full is pronounced by the principal
celebrant alone, with hands extended.
In the parts from
233.
Sacrifice, all the concelebrants pronounce everything together as follows:
Therefore, O Lord, we pray to the end of Look, O Lord, upon the
a.
b.
c.
d.
Therefore, O Lord, we pray with hands extended toward the offerings;
For when the hour had come and In a similar way with hands joined;
the part
the parts
the words of the Lord, with each extending his right hand toward the bread and
toward the chalice, if this seems appropriate; and at the elevation looking toward
them and after this bowing profoundly;
the  parts
Sacrifice with hands extended.
Therefore,  O  Lord,  as  we  now  celebrate  and  Look,  O  Lord,  upon  the
It is appropriate that the intercessions
Therefore, Lord, remember now and To all
234.
of us, your children be assigned to one or other of the concelebrants, who pronounces
them alone, with hands extended, and in a loud voice.
As for other Eucharistic Prayers approved by the Apostolic See, the norms laid
235.
down for each one are to be observed.
The concluding doxology of the Eucharistic Prayer is pronounced solely by the
236.
principal Priest Celebrant or together, if this is desired, with the other concelebrants,
but not by the faithful.
*The Communion Rite
*
237.
Then the principal celebrant, with hands joined, says the introduction to the Lord’s
Prayer.  Next,  with  hands  extended,  he  says  the  Lord’s  Prayer  itself  together  with  the
other concelebrants, who also pray with hands extended, and together with the people.
The
Libera nos* (Deliver us) *is said by the principal celebrant alone, with hands
238.
extended. All the concelebrants, together with the people, pronounce the concluding
acclamation For the kingdom.
239.
After the Deacon or, in the absence of a Deacon, one of the concelebrants, has
given the instruction Let us offer each other the sign of peace, all give one another the
Sign  of Peace. Those  concelebrants  nearer the  principal  celebrant receive  the Sign  of
Peace from him before the Deacon does.
During the
Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God), *the Deacons or some of the concelebrants
240.
may  help  the  principal  celebrant  to  break  the  hosts  for  the  Communion  of  both  the
concelebrants and the people.
241.
After the commingling, the principal celebrant alone, with hands joined, quietly
says either the prayer Domine Iesu Christe, Fili Dei vivi (*Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the 
*
*living God) *or the prayer Perceptio Corporis et Sanguinis tui (*May the receiving of your 
*
*Body and Blood).
*
Once the prayer for Communion has been said, the principal celebrant genuflects
242.
and steps back a little. Then one after another the concelebrants come to the middle of
the altar, genuflect, and reverently take the Body of Christ from the altar. Then holding
it in their right hand, with the left hand placed underneath, they return to their places.
However,  the  concelebrants  may  remain  in  their  places  and  take  the  Body  of  Christ
from the paten held for them by the principal celebrant or held by one or more of the
concelebrants passing in front of them, or they may do so by handing the paten one to
another, and so to the last of them.
Then the principal celebrant takes a host consecrated in the same Mass, holds it
243.
slightly raised above the paten or the chalice, and, facing the people, says the Ecce Agnus
Dei*  (Behold  the  Lamb  of  God)*.  With  the  concelebrants  and  the  people  he  continues,
saying the Domine, non sum dignus* (Lord, I am not worthy).
*
42  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
Then the principal celebrant, facing the altar, says quietly,
Corpus Christi custodiat
244.
me  in  vitam  aeternam*  (May  the  Body  of  Christ  keep  me  safe  for  eternal  life)*,  and
reverently receives the Body of Christ. The concelebrants do likewise, giving themselves
Communion. After them the Deacon receives the Body and Blood of the Lord from the
principal celebrant.
The  Blood  of  the  Lord  may  be  consumed  either  by  drinking  from  the  chalice
245.
directly, or by intinction, or by means of a tube or a spoon.
If Communion is consumed by drinking directly from the chalice, one of these
246.
procedures may be followed:
a.
b.
The principal celebrant, standing at the middle of the altar, takes the chalice and
says quietly, Sanguis Christi custodiat me in vitam aeternam* (May the Blood of 
*
*Christ keep me safe for eternal life)*. He consumes a little of the Blood of Christ and
hands the chalice to the Deacon or a concelebrant. He then distributes Communion
to the faithful (cf. nos. 160-162).
The concelebrants approach the altar one after another or, if two chalices are used,
two by two. They genuflect, partake of the Blood of Christ, wipe the rim of the
chalice, and return to their seats.
The principal celebrant consumes the Blood of the Lord standing as usual at the
middle of the altar.
The concelebrants, however, may partake of the Blood of the Lord while remaining
in their places and drinking from the chalice presented to them by the Deacon or
by one of the concelebrants, or even passed from one to the other. The chalice is
always wiped either by the one who drinks from it or by the one who presents it.
After each has communicated, he returns to his seat.
247.
The Deacon reverently drinks at the altar all of the Blood of Christ that remains,
assisted, if the case requires, by some of the concelebrants. He then carries the chalice
to the credence table and there he or a duly instituted acolyte purifies it, wipes it, and
arranges it as usual (cf. no. 183).
248.
The Communion of the concelebrants may also be arranged in such a way that
each communicates from the Body of the Lord at the altar and, immediately afterwards,
from the Blood of the Lord.
In  this  case  the  principal  celebrant  receives  Communion  under  both  kinds  in  the
usual way (cf. no. 158), observing, however, the rite chosen in each particular instance
for Communion from the chalice; and the other concelebrants should do the same.
After the principal celebrant’s Communion, the chalice is placed at the side of the
altar on another corporal. The concelebrants approach the middle of the altar one by
one, genuflect,  and  communicate from the Body of the Lord; then they move to the
side  of  the  altar  and  partake  of  the  Blood  of  the  Lord,  following  the  rite  chosen  for
Communion from the chalice, as has been remarked above.
The  Communion  of  the  Deacon  and  the  purification  of  the  chalice  take  place  as
described above.
If the concelebrants’ Communion is by intinction, the principal celebrant partakes
249.
of the Body and Blood of the Lord in the usual way, but making sure that enough of the
precious Blood remains in the chalice for the Communion of the concelebrants. Then
the Deacon, or one of the concelebrants, arranges the chalice together with the paten
containing particles of the host, if appropriate, either in the centre of the altar or at the
side on another corporal.
The  concelebrants  approach  the  altar  one  by  one,  genuflect,  and  take  a  particle,
intinct it partly into the chalice, and, holding a purificator under their mouth, consume
the intincted particle. They then return to their places as at the beginning of Mass.
  The  Deacon  also  receives  Communion  by  intinction  and  to  the  concelebrant’s
words,  Corpus  et  Sanguis  Christi*  (The  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ)  *replies,  Amen.
Moreover,  the  Deacon  consumes  at  the  altar  all  that  remains  of  the  Precious  Blood,
assisted, if the case requires, by some of the concelebrants. He carries the chalice to the
credence table and there he or a duly instituted acolyte purifies it, wipes it, and arranges
it as usual.
*The Concluding Rites
*
Everything  else  until  the  end  of  Mass  is  done  by  the  principal  celebrant  in  the
250.
usual way (cf. nos. 166–168), with the other concelebrants remaining at their seats.
Before leaving the altar, the concelebrants make a profound bow to the altar. For
251.
his part the principal celebrant, along with the Deacon, venerates the altar as usual with
a kiss.
III.  MASS AT WHICH ONLy ONE MINISTER PARTICIPATES
At a Mass celebrated by a Priest with only one minister to assist him and to make
252.
the responses, the rite of Mass with the people is followed (cf. nos. 120-169), the minister
saying the people’s parts if appropriate.
If, however, the minister is a Deacon, he performs his proper functions (cf. nos.
253.
171–186) and likewise carries out the other parts, that is, those of the people.
Mass should not be celebrated without a minister, or at least one of the faithful,
254.
except for a just and reasonable cause. In this case, the greetings, the instructions, and
the blessing at the end of Mass are omitted.
Before Mass, the necessary vessels are prepared either at the credence table or on
255.
the right hand side of the altar.
*The Introductory Rites
*
The Priest approaches the altar and, after making a profound bow along with the
256.
minister, venerates the altar with a kiss and goes to the chair. If he wishes, the Priest may
remain at the altar; in which case, the Missal is also prepared there. Then the minister or
the Priest says the Entrance Antiphon.
257.
Then the Priest, standing, makes with the minister the Sign of the Cross as the
Priest says, In the name of the Father. Facing the minister, he greets him, choosing one
of the formulae provided.
Then the Penitential Act takes place, and, in accordance with the rubrics, the
258.
and the Gloria in excelsis* (Glory to God in the highest) *are said.
Kyrie
Then, with hands joined, the Priest pronounces,
259.
Let us pray, and after a suitable
pause, with hands extended, he pronounces the Collect. At the end the minister acclaims,
Amen.
*The Liturgy of the Word
*
The  readings  should,  insofar  as  possible,  be  proclaimed  from  the  ambo  or  a
260.
lectern.
After  the  Collect,  the  minister  reads  the  First  Reading  and  Psalm,  the  Second
261.
Reading, when it is to be said, and the verse of the Alleluia or other chant.
Then the Priest, bowing profoundly, says the prayer
262.
 Munda cor meum* (Cleanse 
*
*my heart)* and after this reads the Gospel. At the end he says, The Gospel of the Lord, to
which the minister replies, Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. The Priest then venerates
44  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
the book with a kiss, saying quietly the formula Per evangelica dicta* (Through the words 
*
*of the Gospel).
*
After this, the Priest says the Symbol or Creed, in accordance with the rubrics,
263.
together with the minister.
The Universal Prayer follows, which may be said even in this form of Mass. The
264.
Priest introduces and concludes it, with the minister announcing the intentions.
*The Liturgy of the Eucharist
*
In  the  Liturgy  of  the  Eucharist,  everything  is  done  as  at  Mass  with  the  people,
265.
except for the following.
266.
After the acclamation at the end of the embolism that follows the Lord’s Prayer,
the Priest says the prayer Domine Iesu Christe, qui dixisti (*Lord Jesus Christ, who said 
*
*to your Apostles). *He then adds, The peace of the Lord be with you always, to which the
minister replies, And with your spirit. If appropriate, the Priest gives the Sign of Peace
to the minister.
Then, while he says the
267.
Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God) *with the minister, the Priest
breaks the host over the paten. After the Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God)*, he performs the
commingling, saying quietly the prayer Haec commixtio (*May this mingling).
*
After  the  commingling,  the  Priest  quietly  says  either  the  prayer
268.
Domine  Iesu
Christe, Fili Dei vivi (*Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God) *or the prayer Perceptio
Corporis et Sanguinis tui (*May the receiving of your Body and Blood).* Then he genuflects,
takes  the  host,  and,  if  the  minister  is  to  receive  Communion,  turns  to  the  minister
and, holding the host a little above the paten or the chalice, says the Ecce Agnus Dei
*(Behold the Lamb of God)*, adding with the minister, Lord, I am not worthy. Then facing
the altar, the Priest partakes of the Body of Christ. If, however, the minister does not
receive Communion, the Priest, after genuflecting, takes the host and, facing the altar,
says quietly, Lord, I am not worthy*, etc., *and the Corpus Christi custodiat me in vitam
aeternam (*May the Body of Christ keep me safe for eternal life), *and consumes the Body
of Christ. Then he takes the chalice and says quietly, Sanguis Christi custodiat me in
vitam aeternam (*May the Blood of Christ keep me safe for eternal life), *and consumes the
Blood of Christ.
Before Communion is given to the minister, the Communion Antiphon is said by
269.
the minister or by the Priest himself.
The Priest purifies the chalice at the credence table or at the altar. If the chalice is
270.
purified at the altar, it may be carried to the credence table by the minister or may be
arranged once again on the altar, at the side.
After the purification of the chalice, the Priest should observe a brief pause for
271.
silence, and after this he says the Prayer after Communion.
*The Concluding Rites
*
The  Concluding  Rites  are  carried  out  as  at  a  Mass  with  the  people,  but  the
Ite,
272.
missa est (*Go forth, the Mass is ended)* is omitted. The Priest venerates the altar as usual
with a kiss and, after making a profound bow with the minister, withdraws.
Iv.  SOME GENERAL NORMS FOR ALL FORMS OF MASS
*Veneration of the Altar and the Book of the Gospels
*
According to traditional practice, the veneration of the altar and of the
273.
*Book of the 
*
*Gospels *is done by means of a kiss. However, where a sign of this kind is not in harmony
with the traditions or the culture of some region, it is for the Conference of Bishops to
establish some other sign in its place, with the consent of the Apostolic See.
*Genuflections and Bows
*
274.
A genuflection, made by bending the right knee to the ground, signifies adoration,
and therefore it is reserved for the Most Blessed Sacrament, as well as for the Holy Cross
from the solemn adoration during the liturgical celebration on Good Friday until the
beginning of the Easter vigil.
During Mass, three genuflections are made by the Priest Celebrant: namely, after the
elevation of the host, after the elevation of the chalice, and before Communion. Certain
specific features to be observed in a concelebrated Mass are noted in their proper place
(cf. nos. 210–251).
If,  however,  the  tabernacle  with  the  Most  Blessed  Sacrament  is  situated  in  the
sanctuary, the Priest, the Deacon, and the other ministers genuflect when they approach
the altar and when they depart from it, but not during the celebration of Mass itself.
Otherwise, all who pass before the Most Blessed Sacrament genuflect, unless they are
moving in procession.
Ministers  carrying  the  processional  cross  or  candles  bow  their  heads  instead  of
genuflecting.
A bow signifies reverence and honour shown to the persons themselves or to the
275.
signs that represent them. There are two kinds of bow: a bow of the head and a bow of
the body.
a.
b.
A bow of the head is made when the three Divine Persons are named together and
at the names of Jesus, of the Blessed virgin Mary, and of the Saint in whose honour
Mass is being celebrated.
A bow of the  body,  that  is to say, a profound bow, is made to the altar; during
the prayers Munda cor meum* (Cleanse my heart) *and In spiritu humilitatis* (With 
*
*humble spirit*); in the Creed at the words et incarnatus est* (and by the Holy Spirit…
*
*and became man); *in the Roman Canon at the Supplices te rogamus* (In humble 
*
*prayer we ask you, almighty God)*. The same kind of bow is made by the Deacon
when he asks for a blessing before the proclamation of the Gospel. In addition, the
Priest bows slightly as he pronounces the words of the Lord at the Consecration.
*Incensation
*
Thurification  or  incensation  is  an  expression  of  reverence  and  of  prayer,  as  is
276.
signified in Sacred Scripture (cf. Ps 140 [141]: 2; Rev 8: 3).
Incense may be used optionally in any form of Mass:
during the Entrance Procession;
at the beginning of Mass, to incense the cross and the altar;
at the procession before the Gospel and the proclamation of the Gospel itself;
after  the  bread  and  the  chalice  have  been  placed  on  the  altar,  to  incense  the
offerings, the cross, and the altar, as well as the Priest and the people;
at the elevation of the host and the chalice after the Consecration.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
The  Priest,  having  put  incense  into  the  thurible,  blesses  it  with  the  Sign  of  the
277.
Cross, without saying anything.
46  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
Before and after an incensation, a profound bow is made to the person or object that
is incensed, except for the altar and the offerings for the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Three swings of the thurible are used to incense: the Most Blessed Sacrament, a relic
of the Holy Cross and images of the Lord exposed for public veneration, the offerings
for the Sacrifice of the Mass, the altar cross, the *Book of the Gospels*, the paschal candle,
the Priest, and the people.
Two swings of the thurible are used to incense relics and images of the Saints exposed
for  public  veneration;  this  should  be  done,  however,  only  at  the  beginning  of  the
celebration, following the incensation of the altar.
The altar is incensed with single swings of the thurible in this way:
a.
b.
if  the  altar  is  freestanding  with  respect  to  the  wall,  the  Priest  incenses  walking
around it;
if the altar is not freestanding, the Priest incenses it while walking first to the right
hand side, then to the left.
The cross, if situated on the altar or near it, is incensed by the Priest before he incenses
the altar; otherwise, he incenses it when he passes in front of it.
The Priest incenses the offerings with three swings of the thurible or by making the
Sign of the Cross over the offerings with the thurible before going on to incense the
cross and the altar.
*The Purification
*
Whenever a fragment of the host adheres to his fingers, especially after the fraction
278.
or after the Communion of the faithful, the Priest should wipe his fingers over the paten
or,  if  necessary,  wash  them.  Likewise,  he  should  also  gather  any  fragments  that  may
have fallen outside the paten.
279.
The sacred vessels are purified by the Priest, the Deacon, or an instituted acolyte after
Communion or after Mass, insofar as possible at the credence table. The purification of
the chalice is done with water alone or with wine and water, which is then consumed by
whoever does the purification. The paten is wiped clean as usual with the purificator.
Care  is  to  be  taken  that  whatever  may  remain  of  the  Blood  of  Christ  after  the
distribution of Communion is consumed immediately and completely at the altar.
If a host or any particle should fall, it is to be picked up reverently; and if any of
280.
the Precious Blood is spilled, the area where the spill occurred should be washed with
water, and this water should then be poured into the *sacrarium *in the sacristy.
*Communion under Both Kinds
*
281.
Holy Communion has a fuller form as a sign when it takes place under both kinds.
For in this form the sign of the Eucharistic banquet is more clearly evident and clearer
expression is given to the divine will by which the new and eternal Covenant is ratified
in the Blood of the Lord, as also the connection between the Eucharistic banquet and
the eschatological banquet in the Kingdom of the Father.105
Sacred pastors should take care to ensure that the faithful who participate in the
282.
rite  or  are  present  at  it,  are  made  aware  by  the  most  suitable  means  possible  of  the
Catholic teaching on the form of Holy Communion as laid down by the Ecumenical
Council of Trent. Above all, they should instruct the Christian faithful that the Catholic
faith  teaches  that  Christ,  whole  and  entire,  and  the  true  Sacrament,  is  received  even
under only one species, and hence that as regards the resulting fruits, those who receive
under only one species are not deprived of any grace that is necessary for salvation.106
105
106
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 32: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p.
558.
 Cf. Ecumenical Council of Trent, Session XXI, *Doctrina de communione sub utraque specie et parvulorum*, 16 July 1562, cap. 1-3:
Furthermore,  they  should  teach  that  the  Church,  in  her  administration  of  the
Sacraments,  has  the  power  to  lay  down  or  alter  whatever  provisions,  apart  from  the
substance of the Sacraments, that she judges to be more readily conducive to reverence
for the Sacraments and the good of the recipients, in view of changing conditions, times,
and places.107 However, at the same time the faithful should be instructed to participate
more readily in this sacred rite, by which the sign of the Eucharistic banquet is made
more fully evident.
In addition to those cases given in the ritual books, Communion under both kinds
283.
is permitted for:
a.
b.
c.
Priests who are not able to celebrate or concelebrate Mass;
the Deacon and others who perform some duty at the Mass;
members of communities at the Conventual Mass or the ‘community’ Mass, along
with seminarians, and all those engaged in a retreat or taking part in a spiritual or
pastoral gathering.
The  Diocesan  Bishop  may  establish  norms  for  Communion  under  both  kinds
for  his  own  diocese,  which  are  also  to  be  observed  in  churches  of  religious  and  at
celebrations with small groups. The Diocesan Bishop is also given the faculty to permit
Communion under both kinds whenever it may seem appropriate to the Priest to whom
a community has been entrusted as its own shepherd, provided that the faithful have
been well instructed and that there is no danger of profanation of the Sacrament or of
the  rite’s  becoming  difficult  because  of  the  large  number  of  participants  or  for  some
other cause.
As to the manner of distributing Holy Communion under both kinds to the faithful
and  the  extent  of  the  faculty  for  doing  so,  the  Conferences  of  Bishops  may  publish
norms, once their decisions have received the *recognitio* of the Apostolic See.
284.
a.
b.
When Communion is distributed under both kinds:
the chalice is usually administered by a Deacon or, in the absence of a Deacon, by
a Priest, or even by a duly instituted acolyte or another extraordinary minister of
Holy Communion, or by one of the faithful who, in a case of necessity, has been
entrusted with this duty for a single occasion;
whatever may remain of the Blood of Christ is consumed at the altar by the Priest
or the Deacon or the duly instituted acolyte who ministered the chalice. The same
then purifies, wipes, and arranges the sacred vessels in the usual way.
Any of the faithful who wish to receive Holy Communion under the species of bread
alone should be given Communion in this form.
285.
a.
b.
For Communion under both kinds the following should be prepared:
If Communion from the chalice is done by drinking directly from the chalice, a
chalice of a sufficiently large size or several chalices are prepared. However, care
should be taken lest beyond what is needed of the Blood of Christ remains to be
consumed at the end of the celebration.
If Communion from the chalice is done by intinction, the hosts should be neither
too thin nor too small, but rather a little thicker than usual, so that after being
intincted partly into the Blood of Christ they can still be easily distributed.
If Communion of the Blood of Christ is carried out by communicants’ drinking
286.
from the chalice, each communicant, after receiving the Body of Christ, moves to the
minister of the chalice and stands facing him. The minister says, The Blood of Christ,
the communicant replies, Amen, and the minister hands over the chalice, which the
Denzinger-Schönmetzer, nos. 1725-1729.
 Cf. *ibidem,* cap. 2: Denzinger-Schönmetzer, no. 1728.
107
48  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
communicant raises to his or her mouth. Each communicant drinks a little from the
chalice, hands it back to the minister, and then withdraws; the minister wipes the rim of
the chalice with the purificator.
287.
If Communion from the chalice is carried out by intinction, each communicant,
holding a Communion-plate under the mouth, approaches the Priest who holds a vessel
with the sacred particles, with a minister standing at his side and holding the chalice.
The Priest takes a host, intincts it partly in the chalice and, showing it, says, The Body
and Blood of Christ. The communicant replies, Amen, receives the Sacrament in the
mouth from the Priest, and then withdraws.
CHAPTER v
**The Arrangement and  
**
**Ornamentation of Churches  
**
**for the Celebration of the Eucharist
**
I.  GENERAL PRINCIPLES
  For  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist,  the  People  of  God  are  normally  gathered
288.
together  in  a  church  or,  if  there  is  no  church  or  if  it  is  too  small,  then  in  another
respectable place that is nonetheless worthy of so great a mystery. Therefore, churches
or other places should be suitable for carrying out the sacred action and for ensuring the
active participation of the faithful. Moreover, sacred buildings and requisites for divine
worship should be truly worthy and beautiful and be signs and symbols of heavenly
realities.108
 Consequently, the Church constantly seeks the noble assistance of the arts and
289.
admits the artistic expressions of all peoples and regions.109 In fact, just as she is intent on
preserving the works of art and the artistic treasures handed down from past centuries110
and, insofar as necessary, on adapting them to new needs, so also she strives to promote
new works of art that are in harmony with the character of each successive age.111
On account of this, in appointing artists and choosing works of art to be admitted
into a church, what should be looked for is that true excellence in art which nourishes
faith and devotion and accords authentically with both the meaning and the purpose
for which it is intended.112
All  churches  should  be  dedicated  or  at  least  blessed.  Cathedrals  and  parish
290.
churches, however, are to be dedicated with a solemn rite.
For  the  proper  construction,  restoration,  and  arrangement  of  sacred  buildings,
291.
all those involved should consult the diocesan commission for the Sacred Liturgy and
sacred art. Moreover, the Diocesan Bishop should employ the counsel and help of this
commission whenever it comes to laying down norms on this matter, approving plans
for new buildings, and making decisions on the more important matters.113
The  ornamentation  of  a  church  should  contribute  toward  its  noble  simplicity
292.
rather than to ostentation. Moreover, in the choice of elements attention should be paid
to  authenticity  and  there  should  be  the  intention  of  fostering  the  instruction  of  the
faithful and the dignity of the entire sacred place.
293.
 The suitable arrangement of a church, and of what goes with it, in such a way as
to meet appropriately the needs of our own age requires not only that care be taken as
regards whatever pertains more immediately to the celebration of sacred actions but also
that the faithful be provided with whatever is conducive to their appropriate comfort
and is normally provided in places where people habitually gather.
108
109
110
111
112
113
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 122-124; Decree on
the Ministry and Life of Priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis*, no. 5; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September
1964, no. 90: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 897; Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 24: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis*
59 (1967), p. 554; *Code of Canon Law*, can. 932 § 1
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 123.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 24: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p.
554.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 123, 129; Sacred
Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 13c: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 880.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 123.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 126; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 91: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56
(1964), p. 898.
50  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
294.
 The People of God which is gathered for Mass is coherently and hierarchically
ordered, and this finds its expression in the variety of ministries and the variety of actions
according to the different parts of the celebration. Hence the general arrangement of the
sacred building must be such that in some way it conveys the image of the assembled
congregation  and  allows  the  appropriate  ordering  of  all  the  participants,  as  well  as
facilitating each in the proper carrying out of his function.
The faithful and the *schola cantorum* (choir) shall have a place that facilitates their
active participation.114
The Priest Celebrant, the Deacon, and the other ministers have places in the sanctuary.
There,  also,  should  be  prepared  seats  for  concelebrants,  but  if  their  number  is  great,
seats should be arranged in another part of the church, though near the altar.
All these elements, even though they must express the hierarchical structure and the
diversity of functions, should nevertheless bring about a close and coherent unity that is
clearly expressive of the unity of the entire holy people. Indeed, the nature and beauty of
the place and all its furnishings should foster devotion and express visually the holiness
of the mysteries celebrated there.
II.  ARRANGEMENT OF THE SANCTUARy
FOR THE SACRED SyNAXIS
295.
The sanctuary is the place where the altar stands, the Word of God is proclaimed,
and the Priest, the Deacon, and the other ministers exercise their functions. It should
be appropriately marked off from the body of the church either by its being somewhat
elevated or by a particular structure and ornamentation. It should, moreover, be large
enough to allow the Eucharist to be easily celebrated and seen.115
*The Altar and its Ornamentation
*
296.
The  altar,  on  which  is  effected  the  Sacrifice  of  the  Cross  made  present  under
sacramental signs, is also the table of the Lord to which the People of God is convoked to
participate in the Mass, and it is also the centre of the thanksgiving that is accomplished
through the Eucharist.
The  celebration  of  the  Eucharist  in  a  sacred  place  is  to  take  place  on  an  altar;
297.
however, outside a sacred place, it may take place on a suitable table, always with the
use of a cloth, a corporal, a cross, and candles.
298.
It is desirable that in every church there be a fixed altar, since this more clearly and
permanently signifies Christ Jesus, the Living Stone (1 Pt 2: 4; cf. Eph 2: 20). In other
places set aside for sacred celebrations, the altar may be movable.
An altar is said to be fixed if it is so constructed as to be attached to the floor and not
removable; it is said to be movable if it can be displaced.
The altar should be built separate from the wall, in such a way that it is possible to
299.
walk around it easily and that Mass can be celebrated at it facing the people, which is
desirable wherever possible. Moreover, the altar should occupy a place where it is truly
the centre toward which the attention of the whole congregation of the faithful naturally
turns.116 The altar should usually be fixed and dedicated.
300.
An  altar,  whether  fixed  or  movable,  should  be  dedicated  according  to  the  rite
prescribed in the Roman Pontifical; but it is permissible for a movable altar simply to
be blessed.
114
115
116
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, nos. 97-98: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p.
899.
 Cf. *ibidem*, no. 91: p. 898.
 Cf. *ibidem.*
301.
In keeping with the Church’s traditional practice and with what the altar signifies,
the table of a fixed altar should be of stone and indeed of natural stone or, in the dioceses
of England and Wales, it may be made of wood which is dignified, solid and well-crafted,
provided that it is structurally immobile. As to the supports or base for supporting the
table, these may be made of any material, provided it is dignified and solid.
A movable altar may be constructed of any noble and solid material suited to liturgical
use, according to the traditions and usages of the different regions.
302.
The practice of the deposition of relics of Saints, even those not Martyrs, under the
altar to be dedicated is fittingly retained. However, care should be taken to ensure the
authenticity of such relics.
In building new churches, it is preferable for a single altar to be erected, one that
303.
in the gathering of the faithful will signify the one Christ and the one Eucharist of the
Church.
In already existing churches, however, when the old altar is so positioned that it makes
the  people’s  participation  difficult  but  cannot  be  moved  without  damage  to  artistic
value, another fixed altar, skillfully made and properly dedicated, should be erected and
the sacred rites celebrated on it alone. In order that the attention of the faithful not be
distracted from the new altar, the old altar should not be decorated in any special way.
304.
Out  of  reverence  for  the  celebration  of  the  memorial  of  the  Lord  and  for  the
banquet in which the Body and Blood of the Lord are offered, there should be, on an
altar where this is celebrated, at least one cloth, white in colour, whose shape, size, and
decoration are in keeping with the altar’s structure.
305.
Moderation should be observed in the decoration of the altar.
During Advent the floral decoration of the altar should be marked by a moderation
suited to the character of this time of year, without expressing in anticipation the full joy
of the Nativity of the Lord. During Lent it is forbidden for the altar to be decorated with
flowers. Exceptions, however, are Laetare Sunday (Fourth Sunday of Lent), Solemnities,
and Feasts.
Floral decoration should always show moderation and be arranged around the altar
rather than on the altar table.
For only what is required for the celebration of the Mass may be placed on the
306.
altar  table:  namely,  from  the  beginning  of  the  celebration  until  the  proclamation  of
the Gospel, the *Book of the Gospels*; then from the Presentation of the Gifts until the
purification  of  the  vessels,  the  chalice  with  the  paten,  a  ciborium,  if  necessary,  and,
finally, the corporal, the purificator, the pall, and the Missal.
In addition, arranged discreetly, there should be whatever may be needed to amplify
the Priest’s voice.
The  candlesticks  required  for  the  different  liturgical  services  for  reasons  of
307.
reverence or the festive character of the celebration (cf. no. 117) should be appropriately
placed  either  on  the  altar  or  around  it,  according  to  the  design  of  the  altar  and  the
sanctuary, so that the whole may be harmonious and the faithful may not be impeded
from a clear view of what takes place at the altar or what is placed upon it.
308.
Likewise, either on the altar or near it, there is to be a cross, with the figure of
Christ crucified upon it, a cross clearly visible to the assembled people. It is desirable
that such a cross should remain near the altar even outside of liturgical celebrations, so
as to call to mind for the faithful the saving Passion of the Lord.
52  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
*The Ambo
*
The  dignity  of  the  Word  of  God  requires  that  in  the  church  there  be  a  suitable
309.
place from which it may be proclaimed and toward which the attention of the faithful
naturally turns during the Liturgy of the Word.117
It  is  appropriate  that  generally  this  place  be  a  stationary  ambo  and  not  simply  a
movable lectern. The ambo must be located in keeping with the design of each church
in such a way that the ordained ministers and readers may be clearly seen and heard by
the faithful.
From the ambo only the readings, the Responsorial Psalm, and the Easter Proclamation
(*Exsultet*) are to be proclaimed; likewise it may be used for giving the Homily and for
announcing the intentions of the Universal Prayer. The dignity of the ambo requires
that only a minister of the word should stand at it.
It  is  appropriate  that  before  being  put  into  liturgical  use  a  new  ambo  be  blessed
according to the rite described in the Roman Ritual.118
*The Chair for the Priest Celebrant and Other Seats
*
The chair of the Priest Celebrant must signify his function of presiding over the
310.
gathering and of directing the prayer. Thus the more suitable place for the chair is facing
the people at the head of the sanctuary, unless the design of the building or other features
prevent  this:  as,  for  example,  if  on  account  of  too  great  a  distance,  communication
between the Priest and the congregation would be difficult, or if the tabernacle were to
be positioned in the centre behind the altar. In any case, any appearance of a throne is
to be avoided.119 It is appropriate that before being put into liturgical use, the chair be
blessed according to the rite described in the *Roman Ritual*.120
  Likewise,  seats  should  be  arranged  in  the  sanctuary  for  concelebrating  Priests
as  well  as  for  Priests  who  are  present  at  the  celebration  in  choir  dress  but  without
concelebrating.
  The seat for the Deacon should be placed near that of the celebrant. For the other
ministers seats should be arranged so that they are clearly distinguishable from seats for
the clergy and so that the ministers are easily able to carry out the function entrusted to
them.121
III.  THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE CHURCH
*The Places for the Faithful
*
Places for the faithful should be arranged with appropriate care so that they are
311.
able to participate in the sacred celebrations, duly following them with their eyes and
their attention. It is desirable that benches or seating usually should be provided for their
use. However, the custom of reserving seats for private persons is to be reprobated.122
Moreover, benches or seating should be so arranged, especially in newly built churches,
that the faithful can easily take up the bodily postures required for the different parts of
the celebration and can have easy access for the reception of Holy Communion.
Care should be taken to ensure that the faithful be able not only to see the Priest, the
Deacon, and the readers but also, with the aid of modern technical means, to hear them
without difficulty.
117
118
119
120
121
122
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 92: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 899.
 Cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis occasione data auspicandi novum ambonem, nos.
900-918.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 92: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 898.
 Cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis occasione data auspicandi novam cathedram seu
sedem praesidentiae, nos. 880-899.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 92: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 898.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 32.
*The Place for the Schola Cantorum and the Musical Instruments
*
The
312.
*schola cantorum* (choir) should be so positioned with respect to the arrangement
of each church that its nature may be clearly evident, namely as part of the assembled
community of the faithful undertaking a specific function. The positioning should also
help the choir to exercise this function more easily and allow each choir member full
sacramental participation in the Mass in a convenient manner.123
The organ and other lawfully approved musical instruments should be placed in a
313.
suitable place so that they can sustain the singing of both the choir and the people and
be heard with ease by everybody if they are played alone. It is appropriate that before
being put into liturgical use, the organ be blessed according to the rite described in the
Roman Ritual.124
In  Advent  the  use  of  the  organ  and  other  musical  instruments  should  be  marked
by  a  moderation  suited  to  the  character  of  this  time  of  year,  without  expressing  in
anticipation the full joy of the Nativity of the Lord.
In Lent the playing of the organ and musical instruments is allowed only in order to
support the singing. Exceptions, however, are Laetare Sunday (Fourth Sunday of Lent),
Solemnities, and Feasts.
*The Place for the Reservation of the Most Holy Eucharist
*
In accordance with the structure of each church and legitimate local customs, the
314.
Most Blessed Sacrament should be reserved in a tabernacle in a part of the church that
is truly noble, prominent, conspicuous, worthily decorated, and suitable for prayer.125
The tabernacle should usually be the only one, be irremovable, be made of solid and
inviolable material that is not transparent, and be locked in such a way that the danger
of profanation is prevented to the greatest extent possible.126 Moreover, it is appropriate
that before it is put into liturgical use, the tabernacle be blessed according to the rite
described in the Roman Ritual.127
It is more appropriate as a sign that on an altar on which Mass is celebrated there
315.
not be a tabernacle in which the Most Holy Eucharist is reserved.128
Consequently,  it  is  preferable  that  the  tabernacle  be  located,  according  to  the
judgement of the Diocesan Bishop:
a.
b.
either in the sanctuary, apart from the altar of celebration, in a appropriate form
and place, not excluding its being positioned on an old altar no longer used for
celebration (cf. no. 303);
129
or even in some chapel suitable for the private adoration and prayer of the faithful
and organically connected to the church and readily noticeable by the Christian
faithful.
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Musicam sacram*, 5 March 1967, no. 23: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 307.
 Cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis organi, nos. 1052-1067.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 54: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 568;
cf. also Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 95: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 898.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967. no. 52: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 568;
Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Inter Oecumenici*, 26 September 1964, no. 95: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 56 (1964), p. 898; Sacred
Congregation for the Sacraments, Instruction, *Nullo umquam tempore*, 28 May 1938, no. 4: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 30 (1938), pp. 199-
200; Rituale Romanum, *De sacra Communione et de cultu mysterii eucharistici extra Missam*, editio typica, 1973, nos. 10-11; *Code of 
*
*Canon Law*, can. 938 § 3
 Cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis occasione data auspicandi novum tabernaculum
eucharisticum, nos. 919-929.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 55: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p.
569.
 Cf. Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 53: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 568;
Rituale Romanum, *De sacra Communione et de cultu mysterii eucharistici extra Missam*, editio typica, 1973, no. 9; *Code of Canon Law*,
can. 938 §2; John Paul II, Apostolic Letter, *Dominicae Cenae, *24 February 1980, no. 3: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* (1980), pp. 117-119.
54  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
316.
In accordance with traditional custom, near the tabernacle a special lamp, fueled
by oil or wax, should shine permanently to indicate the presence of Christ and honour
it.130
In no way should any of the other things be forgotten which are prescribed by law
317.
concerning the reservation of the Most Holy Eucharist.131
*Sacred Images
*
318.
In  the  earthly  Liturgy,  the  Church  participates,  by  a  foretaste,  in  that  heavenly
Liturgy which is celebrated in the holy city of Jerusalem, toward which she journeys
as a pilgrim, and where Christ is seated at the right hand of God; and by venerating
the memory of the Saints, she hopes one day to have some share and fellowship with
them.132
Thus, in sacred buildings images of the Lord, of the Blessed virgin Mary, and of the
Saints, in accordance with most ancient tradition of the Church, should be displayed
for  veneration  by  the  faithful133  and  should  be  so  arranged  so  as  to  lead  the  faithful
toward  the  mysteries  of  faith  celebrated  there.  Care  should,  therefore,  be  taken  that
their number not be increased indiscriminately, and moreover that they be arranged
in proper order so as not to draw the attention of the faithful to themselves and away
from the celebration itself.134 There should usually be only one image of any given Saint.
Generally speaking, in the ornamentation and arrangement of a church, as far as images
are concerned, provision should be made for the devotion of the entire community as
well as for the beauty and dignity of the images.
130
131
132
133
134
 Cf. *Code of Canon Law*, can. 940; Sacred Congregation of Rites, Instruction, *Eucharisticum mysterium*, 25 May 1967, no. 57: *Acta Ap-
*
*ostolicae Sedis* 59 (1967), p. 569; Rituale Romanum, *De sacra Communione et de cultu mysterii eucharistici extra Missam*, editio typica,
1973, no. 11.
 Cf. particularly in Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments, Instruction, *Nullo umquam tempore, *28 May 1938: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis*
30 (1938), pp. 198-207; *Code of Canon Law*, cann. 934-944.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 8.
 Cf. Pontificale Romanum, *Ordo Dedicationis ecclesiae et altaris*, editio typica, 1977, cap. Iv, no. 10; Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictioni-
*
*bus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo ad benedicendas imagines quae fidelium venerationi publicae exhibentur, nos. 984-1031.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 125.
CHAPTER vI
**The Requisites for the Celebration of Mass
**
I.  THE BREAD AND WINE FOR
CELEBRATING THE EUCHARIST
Following the example of Christ, the Church has always used bread and wine with
319.
water to celebrate the Lord’s Supper.
The bread for celebrating the Eucharist must be made only from wheat, must be
320.
recently  made,  and,  according  to  the  ancient  tradition  of  the  Latin  Church,  must  be
unleavened.
By reason of the sign, it is required that the material for the Eucharistic Celebration
321.
truly have the appearance of food. Therefore, it is desirable that the Eucharistic Bread,
even though unleavened and made in the traditional form, be fashioned in such a way
that the Priest at Mass with the people is truly able to break it into parts and distribute
these to at least some of the faithful. However, small hosts are not at all excluded when
the large number of those receiving Holy Communion or other pastoral reasons call
for them. Moreover, the gesture of the fraction or breaking of bread, which was quite
simply the term by which the Eucharist was known in apostolic times, will bring out
more clearly the force and importance of the sign of the unity of all in the one bread,
and of the sign of charity by the fact that the one bread is distributed among the brothers
and sisters.
The wine for the celebration of the Eucharist must be from the fruit of the vine
322.
(cf.  Lk  22:  18),  natural,  and  unadulterated,  that  is,  without  admixture  of  extraneous
substances.
Diligent care should be taken to ensure that the bread and wine intended for the
323.
Eucharist are kept in a perfect state of conservation: that is, that the wine does not turn
to vinegar nor the bread spoil or become too hard to be broken easily.
324.
If  after  the  Consecration  or  as  he  receives  Communion,  the  Priest  notices  that
not  wine  but  only  water  was  poured  into  the  chalice,  he  pours  the  water  into  some
container, pours wine with water into the chalice and consecrates it, saying the part of
narrative relating to the Consecration of the chalice, without being obliged to consecrate
the bread again.
II.  SACRED FURNISHINGS IN GENERAL
325.
As in the case of the building of churches, so also regarding all sacred furnishings,
the  Church  admits  the  manner  of  art  of  each  individual  region  and  accepts  those
adaptations  that  are  in  keeping  with  the  culture  and  traditions  of  the  individual
nations, provided that all are suited to the purpose for which the sacred furnishings are
intended.135
In  this  matter  as  well,  that  noble  simplicity  should  be  ensured  which  is  the  best
accompaniment of genuine art.
326.
In choosing materials for sacred furnishings, besides those which are traditional,
others are admissible that, according to the mentality of our own age, are considered to
be noble and are durable, and well suited for sacred use. Of these matters the Conference
of Bishops in each region will be the judge (cf. no. 390).
135
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 128.
56  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
III.  SACRED vESSELS
Among the requisites for the celebration of Mass, the sacred vessels are held in
327.
special honour, and among these especially the chalice and paten, in which the bread
and wine are offered and consecrated and from which they are consumed.
Sacred vessels should be made from precious metal. If they are made from metal
328.
that rusts or from a metal less precious than gold, they should generally be gilded on
the inside.
According  to  the  judgement  of  the  Conference  of  Bishops,  its  decisions  having
329.
received the *recognitio* of the Apostolic See, sacred vessels may also be made from other
solid materials which in the common estimation in each region are considered precious
or noble, for example, ebony or other harder woods, provided that such materials are
suitable for sacred use. In this case, preference is always to be given to materials that
do not easily break or deteriorate. This applies to all vessels that are intended to hold
the hosts, such as the paten, the ciborium, the pyx, the monstrance, and others of this
kind.
As regards chalices and other vessels that are intended to serve as receptacles for
330.
the Blood of the Lord, they are to have a bowl of material that does not absorb liquids.
The base, on the other hand, may be made of other solid and worthy materials.
For  the  Consecration  of  hosts,  a  large  paten  may  fittingly  be  used,  on  which  is
331.
placed the bread both for the Priest and the Deacon and also for the other ministers and
for the faithful.
As regards the form of the sacred vessels, it is for the artist to fashion them in a
332.
manner that is more particularly in keeping with the customs of each region, provided
the  individual  vessels  are  suitable  for  their  intended  liturgical  use  and  are  clearly
distinguishable from vessels intended for everyday use.
As for the blessing of sacred vessels, the rites prescribed in the liturgical books
333.
should be followed.136
The practice should be kept of building in the sacristy a
334.
poured the water from the washing of sacred vessels and linens (cf. no. 280).
*sacrarium* into which is
Iv.  SACRED vESTMENTS
In the Church, which is the Body of Christ, not all members have the same function.
335.
This diversity of offices is shown outwardly in the celebration of the Eucharist by the
diversity of sacred vestments, which must therefore be a sign of the function proper
to each minister. Moreover, these same sacred vestments should also contribute to the
decoration of the sacred action itself. The vestments worn by Priests and Deacons, as
well as the attire worn by lay ministers, are blessed before being put into liturgical use
according to the rite described in the Roman Ritual.137
The sacred garment common to all ordained and instituted ministers of any rank
336.
is the alb, to be tied at the waist with a cincture unless it is made so as to fit even without
such. Before the alb is put on, should this not completely cover the ordinary clothing
at the neck, an amice should be used. The alb may not be exchanged for a surplice, not
even over a cassock, on occasions when a chasuble or dalmatic is to be worn or when,
according to the norms, only a stole is worn without a chasuble or dalmatic.
136
137
  Cf.  Pontificale  Romanum,  *Ordo  Dedicationis  ecclesiae  et  altaris*,  editio  typica,  1977,  Ordo  benedictionis  calicis  et  patenae;  Rituale
Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis rerum quæ in liturgicis celebrationibus usurpantur, nos. 1068-
1084.
 Cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, Ordo benedictionis rerum quae in liturgicis celebrationibus usurpantur,
no. 1070.
337.
The  vestment  proper  to  the  Priest  Celebrant  at  Mass  and  during  other  sacred
actions directly connected with Mass is the chasuble worn, unless otherwise indicated,
over the alb and stole.
338.
The vestment proper to the Deacon is the dalmatic, worn over the alb and stole;
however, the dalmatic may be omitted out of necessity or on account of a lesser degree
of solemnity.
Acolytes, readers, and other lay ministers may wear the alb or other suitable attire
339.
that has been legitimately approved by the Conference of Bishops (cf. no. 390).
The stole is worn by the Priest around his neck and hanging down in front of his
340.
chest, while it is worn by the Deacon over his left shoulder and drawn diagonally across
the chest to the right side, where it is fastened.
 The cope is worn by the Priest in processions and during other sacred actions, in
341.
accordance with the rubrics proper to the individual rites.
342.
As regards the form of sacred vestments, Conferences of Bishops may determine
and  propose  to  the  Apostolic  See  adaptations  that  correspond  to  the  needs  and  the
usages of the individual regions.138
343.
 For making sacred vestments, in addition to traditional materials, natural fabrics
proper to each region may be used, and also artificial fabrics that are in keeping with
the dignity of the sacred action and the sacred person. The Conference of Bishops will
be the judge of this matter.139
344.
It  is  fitting  that  the  beauty  and  nobility  of  each  vestment  not  be  sought  in  an
abundance of overlaid ornamentation, but rather in the material used and in the design.
Ornamentation on vestments should, moreover, consist of figures, that is, of images or
symbols, that denote sacred use, avoiding anything unbecoming to this.
Diversity of colour in the sacred vestments has as its purpose to give more effective
345.
expression even outwardly whether to the specific character of the mysteries of faith to
be celebrated or to a sense of Christian life’s passage through the course of the liturgical
year.
As regards the colour of sacred vestments, traditional usage should be observed,
346.
namely:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
The  colour  white  is  used  in  the  Offices  and  Masses  during  Easter  Time  and
Christmas  Time;  on  the  Solemnity  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity;  and  furthermore
on celebrations of the Lord other than of his Passion, celebrations of the Blessed
virgin  Mary,  of  the  Holy  Angels,  and  of  Saints  who  were  not  Martyrs;  on  the
Solemnities of All Saints (1 November) and of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist
(24 June); and on the Feasts of St. John the Evangelist (27 December), of the Chair
of  St.  Peter  (22  February),  and  of  the  Conversion  of  St.  Paul  (25  January).  The
colour white may also be worn by way of exception in Offices and Masses for the
dead in the dioceses of England and Wales.
The colour red is used on Palm Sunday of the Lord’s Passion and on Friday of Holy
Week, on Pentecost Sunday, on celebrations of the Lord’s Passion, on the ‘birthday’
feast days of Apostles and Evangelists, and on celebrations of Martyr Saints.
The colour green is used in the Offices and Masses of Ordinary Time.
The colour violet or purple is used in Advent and Lent. It may also be worn in
Offices and Masses for the Dead.
The colour black may be used, where it is the practice, in Masses for the Dead.
138
139
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 128.
 Cf. *ibidem*.
58  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
f.
g.
The colour rose may be used, where it is the practice, on
Sunday of Advent) and on Laetare Sunday (Fourth Sunday of Lent).
On more solemn days, festive, that is, more precious, sacred vestments may be
used even if not of the colour of the day.
Gaudete Sunday (Third
Moreover, Conferences of Bishops may determine and propose to the Apostolic See
adaptations  regarding  liturgical  colours  that  correspond  to  the  needs  and  culture  of
peoples.
347.
Ritual Masses are celebrated in their proper colour, in white, or in a festive colour;
Masses for various Needs, on the other hand, are celebrated in the colour proper to the
day or the time of year or in violet if they have a penitential character, for example, nos.
31, 33 or 38; votive Masses are celebrated in the colour suited to the Mass itself or even
in the colour proper to the day or the time of the year.
v.  OTHER THINGS INTENDED FOR CHURCH USE
348.
Besides  the  sacred  vessels  and  the  sacred  vestments,  for  which  some  particular
material  is  prescribed,  other  furnishings  that  either  are  intended  for  direct  liturgical
use140 or are in any other way admitted into a church should be worthy and in keeping
with their particular intended purpose.
349.
Special  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  liturgical  books,  particularly  the
*Book of the Gospels *and the Lectionary, which are intended for the proclamation of the
Word of God and hence receive special veneration, are to be in a liturgical action truly
signs and symbols of higher realities and hence should be truly worthy, dignified, and
beautiful.
Furthermore,  every  care  is  to  be  taken  with  respect  to  those  things  directly
350.
associated  with  the  altar  and  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist,  for  example,  the  altar
cross and the cross carried in procession.
Every effort should be made, even in minor matters, to observe appropriately the
351.
requirements of art and to ensure that a noble simplicity is combined with elegance.
140
 For blessing objects that are intended for liturgical use in churches, cf. Rituale Romanum, *De Benedictionibus*, editio typica, 1984, pars
III.
CHAPTER vII
**The Choice of the Mass and its Parts
**
352.
The pastoral effectiveness of a celebration will be greatly increased if the texts of
the  readings,  the  prayers  and  the  liturgical  chants  correspond  as  aptly  as  possible  to
the needs, the preparation and the culture of the participants. This will be achieved by
appropriate use of the many possibilities of choice described below.
Hence  in  arranging  the  celebration  of  Mass,  the  Priest  should  be  attentive  rather
to the common spiritual good of the People of God than to his own inclinations. He
should also remember that choices of this kind are to be made in harmony with those
who exercise some part in the celebration, including the faithful, as regards the parts
that more directly pertain to them.
Since,  indeed,  many  possibilities  are  provided  for  choosing  the  different  parts
of the Mass, it is necessary for the Deacon, the readers, the psalmist, the cantor, the
commentator,  and  the  choir  to  know  properly  before  the  celebration  the  texts  that
concern each and that are to be used and it is necessary that nothing be in any sense
improvised. For harmonious ordering and carrying out of the rites will greatly help in
disposing the faithful for participation in the Eucharist.
I.  THE CHOICE OF MASS
On Solemnities the Priest is obliged to follow the Calendar of the church where
353.
he is celebrating.
On Sundays, on the weekdays during Advent, Christmas Time, Lent, and Easter
354.
Time, on Feasts, and on Obligatory Memorials:
a.
b.
If Mass is celebrated with the people, the Priest should follow the Calendar of the
church where he is celebrating;
If Mass is celebrated with the participation of one minister only, the Priest may
choose either the Calendar of the church or his proper Calendar.
355.
a.
b.
c.
On Optional Memorials:
On the weekdays of Advent from 17 December to 24 December, on days within
the Octave of the Nativity of the Lord, and on the weekdays of Lent, except Ash
Wednesday and during Holy Week, the Mass texts for the current liturgical day
are  used;  but  the  Collect  may  be  taken  from  a  Memorial  which  happens  to  be
inscribed  in  the  General  Calendar  for  that  day,  except  on  Ash  Wednesday  and
during Holy Week. On weekdays of Easter Time, Memorials of Saints may rightly
be celebrated in full.
On  weekdays  of  Advent  before  17  December,  on  weekdays  of  Christmas  Time
from  2  January,  and  on  weekdays  of  Easter  Time,  one  of  the  following  may  be
chosen: either the Mass of the weekday, or the Mass of the Saint or of one of the
Saints  whose  Memorial  is  observed,  or  the  Mass  of  any  Saint  inscribed  in  the
*Martyrology *for that day.
On  weekdays  in  Ordinary  Time,  there  may  be  chosen  either  the  Mass  of  the
weekday, or the Mass of an Optional Memorial which happens to occur on that
day, or the Mass of any Saint inscribed in the *Martyrology *for that day, or a Mass
for various Needs, or a votive Mass.
If he celebrates with the people, the Priest will take care not to omit too frequently
and without sufficient reason the readings assigned each day in the Lectionary to the
weekdays, for the Church desires that a richer portion at the table of God’s Word should
be spread before the people.141
141
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 51.
60  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
For the same reason he should choose Masses for the Dead in moderation, for every
Mass is offered for both the living and the dead, and there is a commemoration of the
dead in the Eucharistic Prayer.
Where, however, the Optional Memorials of the Blessed virgin Mary or of the Saints
are dear to the faithful, the legitimate devotion of the latter should be satisfied.
Moreover, as regards the option of choosing between a Memorial inscribed in the
General  Calendar  and  one  inserted  in  a  diocesan  or  religious  Calendar,  preference
should be given, all else being equal and in keeping with tradition, to the Memorial in
the particular Calendar.
II.  THE CHOICE OF TEXTS FOR THE MASS
In choosing texts for the different parts of the Mass, whether for the time of the
356.
year or for Saints, the norms that follow should be observed.
*The Readings
*
357.
Sundays  and  Solemnities  have  assigned  to  them  three  readings,  that  is,  from  a
Prophet, an Apostle, and a Gospel, by which the Christian people are instructed in the
continuity of the work of salvation according to God’s wonderful design. These readings
should be followed strictly. In Easter Time, according to the tradition of the Church,
instead  of  being  from  the  Old  Testament,  the  reading  is  taken  from  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles.
For Feasts, two readings are assigned. If, however, according to the norms a Feast is
raised to the rank of a Solemnity, a third reading is added, and this is taken from the
Common.
For Memorials of Saints, unless proper readings are given, the readings assigned for
the weekday are normally used. In certain cases, particularized readings are provided,
that  is to say,  readings which highlight some particular aspect of the spiritual life or
activity of the Saint. The use of such readings is not to be insisted upon, unless a pastoral
reason truly suggests it.
358.
In the Lectionary for weekdays, readings are provided for each day of every week
throughout the entire course of the year; hence, these readings will in general be used
on  the  days  to  which  they  are  assigned,  unless  there  occurs  a  Solemnity,  a  Feast,  or
Memorial that has its own New Testament readings, that is to say, readings in which
mention is made of the Saint being celebrated.
Should,  however,  the  continuous  reading  during  the  week  from  time  to  time  be
interrupted,  on  account  of  some  Solemnity  or  Feast,  or  some  particular  celebration,
then the Priest shall be permitted, bearing in mind the scheme of readings for the entire
week, either to combine parts omitted with other readings or to decide which readings
are to be given preference over others.
In  Masses  for  special  groups,  the  Priest  shall  be  allowed  to  choose  texts  more
particularly suited to the particular celebration, provided they are taken from the texts
of an approved Lectionary.
In addition, in the Lectionary a special selection of texts from Sacred Scripture is
359.
given for Ritual Masses into which certain Sacraments or Sacramentals are incorporated,
or for Masses that are celebrated for certain needs.
Sets  of  readings  of  this  kind  have  been  so  prescribed  so  that  through  a  more  apt
hearing of  the Word of  God the faithful may be led to a fuller understanding of the
mystery in which they are participating, and may be educated to a more ardent love of
the Word of God.
Therefore, the texts proclaimed in the celebration are to be chosen keeping in mind
both an appropriate pastoral reason and the options allowed in this matter.
At times, a longer and shorter form of the same text is given. In choosing between
360.
these  two  forms,  a  pastoral  criterion  should  be  kept  in  mind.  On  such  an  occasion,
attention should be paid to the capacity of the faithful to listen with fruit to a reading
of greater or lesser length, and to their capacity to hear a more complete text, which is
then explained in the Homily.142
361.
When a possibility is given of choosing between one or other text laid down, or
suggested as optional, attention shall be paid to the good of participants, whether, that is
to say, it is a matter of using an easier text or one more appropriate for a given gathering,
or  of  repeating  or  setting  aside  a  text  that  is  assigned  as  proper  to  some  particular
celebration while being optional for another,143 just as pastoral advantage may suggest.
Such a situation may arise either when the same text would have to be read again
within a few days, as, for example, on a Sunday and on a subsequent weekday, or when
it is feared that a certain text might give rise to some difficulties for a particular group
of the Christian faithful. However, care should be taken that, when choosing scriptural
passages, parts of Sacred Scripture are not permanently excluded.
In addition to the options noted above for choosing certain more suitable texts,
362.
the Conference of Bishops has the faculty, in particular circumstances, to indicate some
adaptations as regards readings, provided that the texts are chosen from a duly approved
Lectionary.
*The Orations
*
363.
 In any Mass the orations proper to that Mass are used, unless otherwise noted.
On  Memorials  of  Saints,  the  proper  Collect  is  said  or,  if  this  is  lacking,  one  from
an  appropriate  Common.  As  to  the  Prayer  over  the  Offerings  and  the  Prayer  after
Communion, unless these are proper, they may be taken either from the Common or
from the weekday of the current time of year.
On the weekdays in Ordinary Time, however, besides the orations from the previous
Sunday, orations from another Sunday in Ordinary Time may be used, or one of the
Prayers for various Needs provided in the Missal. However, it shall always be permissible
to use from these Masses the Collect alone.
In this way a richer collection of texts is provided, by which the prayer life of the
faithful is more abundantly nourished.
However, during the more important times of the year, provision has already been
made for this by means of the orations proper to these times of the year that exist for
each weekday in the Missal.
*The Eucharistic Prayer
*
The numerous Prefaces with which the Roman Missal
364.
 is endowed have as their
purpose  to  bring  out  more  fully  the  motives  for  thanksgiving  within  the  Eucharistic
Prayer and to set out more clearly the different facets of the mystery of salvation.
The choice between the Eucharistic Prayers found in the Order of Mass is suitably
365.
guided by the following norms:
a.
Eucharistic  Prayer  I,  or  the  Roman  Canon,  which  may  always  be  used,  is
especially suited for use on days to which a proper text for the Communicantes
*(In communion with those whose memory we venerate) *is assigned or in Masses
endowed  with  a  proper  form  of  the  Hanc  igitur*  (Therefore,  Lord,  we  pray)  *and
 Missale Romanum, *Ordo lectionum Missae*, editio typica altera, 1981, Praenotanda, no. 80
142
143   *Ibidem,* no. 81.
62  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
b.
c.
d.
also in the celebrations of the Apostles and of the Saints mentioned in the Prayer
itself; likewise it is especially suited for use on Sundays, unless for pastoral reasons
Eucharistic Prayer III is preferred.
Eucharistic Prayer II, on account of its particular features, is more appropriately
used  on  weekdays  or  in  special  circumstances.  Although  it  is  provided  with  its
own Preface, it may also be used with other Prefaces, especially those that sum
up the mystery of salvation, for example, the Common Prefaces. When Mass is
celebrated  for  a  particular  deceased  person,  the  special  formula  given  may  be
used at the proper point, namely, before the part *Remember also our brothers and 
*
*sisters.
*
Eucharistic Prayer III may be said with any Preface. Its use should be preferred on
Sundays and festive days. If, however, this Eucharistic Prayer is used in Masses for
the Dead, the special formula for a deceased person may be used, to be included
at the proper place, namely after the words: *in your compassion, O merciful Father, 
*
*gather to yourself all your children scattered throughout the world.
*
Eucharistic  Prayer  Iv  has  an  invariable  Preface  and  gives  a  fuller  summary  of
salvation history. It may be used when a Mass has no Preface of its own and on
Sundays in Ordinary Time. On account of its structure, no special formula for a
deceased person may be inserted into this prayer.
*The Chants
*
It is not permitted to substitute other chants for those found in the Order of Mass,
366.
for example, at the Agnus Dei* (Lamb of God)*.
In choosing the chants between the readings, as well as the chants at the Entrance,
367.
at the Offertory, and at Communion, the norms laid down in their proper places are to
be observed (cf. nos. 40-41, 47-48, 61-64, 74, 86-88).
*Masses and Prayers for Various Needs  and Occasions  and Masses for the Dead  *63
CHAPTER vIII
**Masses and Prayers for Various Needs  
**
**and Occasions  
**
**and Masses for the Dead
**
I.  MASSES AND PRAyERS FOR
vARIOUS NEEDS AND OCCASIONS
Since the liturgy of the Sacraments and Sacramentals has as its effect that for the
368.
faithful who are properly disposed almost every event in life is sanctified by the divine
grace that flows from the Paschal Mystery,144 and because the Eucharist is the Sacrament
of Sacraments, the Missal provides examples of Mass formularies and orations that may
be used in the various occasions of Christian life for the needs of the whole world or for
the needs of the Church, whether universal or local.
 In view of the rather broad possibilities of choice among the readings and orations,
369.
it is desirable that Masses for various Needs and Occasions be used in moderation, that
is, when truly required.
370.
In  all  the  Masses  for  various  Needs  and  Occasions,  unless  expressly  indicated
otherwise, it is permissible to use the weekday readings and also the chants between
them, if they are suited to the celebration.
Among Masses of this kind are included Ritual Masses, Masses for various Needs
371.
and Occasions and votive Masses.
Ritual  Masses  are  connected  to  the  celebration  of  certain  Sacraments  or
372.
Sacramentals.  They  are  prohibited  on  Sundays  of  Advent,  Lent,  and  Easter,  on
Solemnities, on the days within the Octave of Easter, on the Commemoration of All
the Faithful Departed (All Souls’ Day), on Ash Wednesday, and during Holy Week, and
furthermore due regard is to be had for the norms set out in the ritual books or in the
Masses themselves.
Masses  for  various  Needs  and  Occasions  are  used  in  certain  situations  either
373.
as  occasion  arises  or  at  fixed  times.  It  is  from  these  that  Masses  may  be  chosen  by
the  competent  authority  for  special  days  of  prayer  in  the  course  of  the  year  that  are
established by the Conference of Bishops.
If any case of a graver need or of pastoral advantage should arise, at the direction
374.
of the Diocesan Bishop or with his permission, an appropriate Mass may be celebrated
on any day except Solemnities, the Sundays of Advent, Lent, and Easter, days within the
Octave of Easter, the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed (All Souls’ Day),
Ash Wednesday and the days of Holy Week.
375.
votive Masses of the mysteries of the Lord or in honour of the Blessed virgin Mary
or of the Angels or of any given Saint or of all the Saints may be said in response to the
devotion of the faithful on weekdays in Ordinary Time, even if an Optional Memorial
occurs. However, it is not permitted to celebrate as votive Masses those that refer to
mysteries related to events in the life of the Lord or of the Blessed virgin Mary, with
the exception of the Mass of the Immaculate Conception, since their celebration is an
integral part of the course of the liturgical year.
376.
On days when there occurs an Obligatory Memorial or on a weekday of Advent up
to and including 16 December, of Christmas Time from 2 January, and of Easter Time
144
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 61.
64  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
after the Octave of Easter, Masses for various Needs and Occasions and votive Masses
are in principle forbidden. If, however, some real necessity or pastoral advantage calls
for it, in the estimation of the rector of the church or the Priest Celebrant himself, a
Mass appropriate to the same may be used in a celebration with the people.
On weekdays in Ordinary Time when an Optional Memorial occurs or when the
377.
Office is of the weekday, it is permissible to celebrate any Mass for various Needs and
Occasions, or use any prayer for the same, but to the exclusion of Ritual Masses.
378.
Particularly recommended is the Saturday commemoration of the Blessed virgin
Mary, because it is to the Mother of the Redeemer that in the Liturgy of the Church
firstly and before all the Saints veneration is given.145
II.  MASSES FOR THE DEAD
The Church offers the Eucharistic Sacrifice of Christ’s Pasch for the dead so that,
379.
since  all  the  members  of  Christ’s  Body  are  in  communion  with  one  another,  what
implores spiritual help for some, may bring comforting hope to others.
Among  the  Masses  for  the  Dead,  the  Funeral  Mass  holds  first  place.  It  may  be
380.
celebrated on any day except for Solemnities that are Holydays of Obligation, Thursday
of Holy Week, the Paschal Triduum, and the Sundays of Advent, Lent, and Easter, with
due regard also for all the other requirements of the norm of the law.146
A Mass for the Dead, on receiving the news of a death, for the final burial, or the
381.
first anniversary, may be celebrated even on days within the Octave of the Nativity of
the Lord, on days when an Obligatory Memorial occurs, and on weekdays other than
Ash Wednesday or the weekdays of Holy Week.
Other  Masses  for  the  Dead  or  ‘daily’  Masses,  may  be  celebrated  on  weekdays
in  Ordinary  Time  on  which  Optional  Memorials  occur  or  when  the  Office  is  of  the
weekday, provided such Masses are actually applied for the dead.
At Funeral Masses there should usually be a short Homily, but to the exclusion of
382.
a funeral eulogy of any kind.
The  faithful,  and  especially  those  of  the  deceased’s  family,  should  be  urged  to
383.
participate in the Eucharistic Sacrifice offered for the deceased person, also by receiving
Holy Communion.
384.
If the Funeral Mass is directly joined to the rite of burial, once the Prayer after
Communion has been said and omitting the Concluding Rites, there takes place the Rite
of Final Commendation or Farewell. This rite is celebrated only if the body is present.
385.
In  the  arranging  and  choosing  of  the  variable  parts  of  the  Mass  for  the  Dead,
especially the Funeral Mass (for example, orations, readings, and the Universal Prayer),
pastoral  considerations  bearing  upon  the  deceased,  the  family,  and  those  attending
should be kept in mind.
Moreover, pastors should take into special account those who are present at a liturgical
celebration or who hear the Gospel on the occasion of the funeral and who may be non-
Catholics  or  Catholics  who  never  or  hardly  ever  participate  in  the  Eucharist  or  who
seem even to have lost the faith. For Priests are ministers of Christ’s Gospel for all.
145
146
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, *Lumen gentium*, no. 54; Paul vI, Apostolic
Exhortation, *Marialis cultus*, 2 February 1974, no. 9: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 66 (1974), pp. 122-123
 Cf. particularly *Code of Canon Law*, cann. 1176-1185; Rituale Romanum, *Ordo Exsequiarum*, editio typica, 1969.
CHAPTER IX
**Adaptations within the Competence of  
**
**Bishops and Bishops’ Conferences
**
The renewal of the Roman Missal carried out in our time in accordance with the
386.
decrees  of  the  Second  vatican  Ecumenical  Council  has  taken  great  care  that  all  the
faithful may display in the celebration of the Eucharist that full, conscious, and active
participation that is required by the very nature of the Liturgy and to which the faithful,
in virtue of their status as such, have a right and duty.147
However, in order that such a celebration may correspond all the more fully to the
norms and the spirit of the Sacred Liturgy, certain further adaptations are set out in
this Instruction and in the Order of Mass and entrusted to the judgement either of the
Diocesan Bishop or of the Conferences of Bishops.
The Diocesan Bishop, who is to be regarded as the High Priest of his flock, from
387.
whom the life in Christ of his faithful in some sense derives and upon whom it depends,148
must promote, regulate, and be vigilant over the liturgical life in his diocese. It is to him
that in this Instruction is entrusted the regulating of the discipline of concelebration
(cf. nos. 202, 374) and the establishing of norms regarding the function of serving the
Priest at the altar (cf. no. 107), the distribution of Holy Communion under both kinds
(cf. no. 283), and the construction and ordering of churches (cf. no. 291). It is above all
for him, moreover, to nourish the spirit of the Sacred Liturgy in the Priests, Deacons,
and faithful.
Those adaptations spoken of below that necessitate a wider degree of coordination
388.
are to be decided, in accord with the norm of law, in the Conference of Bishops.
389.
It is the competence, in the first place, of the Conferences of Bishops to prepare
and approve an edition of this Roman Missal in the authorized vernacular languages,
so that, once their decisions have been accorded the *recognitio* of the Apostolic See, the
edition may be used in the regions to which it pertains.149
The  Roman  Missal,  whether  in  Latin  or  in  legitimately  approved  vernacular
translations, is to be published in its entirety.
It  is  for  the  Conferences  of  Bishops  to  formulate  the  adaptations  indicated  in
390.
this General Instruction and in the Order of Mass and, once their decisions have been
accorded the *recognitio* of the Apostolic See, to introduce them into the Missal itself.
They are such as these:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the gestures and bodily posture of the faithful (cf. no. 43);
the gestures of veneration toward the altar and the Book of the Gospels (cf. no.
273);
the  texts  of  the  chants  at  the  Entrance,  at  the  Presentation  of  the  Gifts,  and  at
Communion (cf. nos. 48, 74, 87);
the  readings  from  Sacred  Scripture  to  be  used  in  special  circumstances  (cf.  no.
362);
the form of the gesture of peace (cf. no. 82);
the manner of receiving Holy Communion (cf. nos. 160, 283);
the materials for the altar and sacred furnishings, especially the sacred vessels, and
also the materials, form, and colour of the liturgical vestments (cf. nos. 301, 326,
329, 339, 342-346).
147
148
149
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 14.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 41.
 Cf. *Code of Canon Law*, can. 838 §3.
66  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
It shall be permissible for Directories or pastoral Instructions that the Conferences
of Bishops judge useful to be included, with the prior *recognitio* of the Apostolic See, in
the Roman Missal at an appropriate place.
391.
It is for the same Conferences of Bishops to attend to the translations of the biblical
texts that are used in the celebration of Mass, exercising special care in this. For it is out
of the Sacred Scripture that the readings are read and are explained in the Homily and
that Psalms are sung, and it is by the influence of Sacred Scripture and at its prompting
that prayers, orations, and liturgical chants are fashioned in such a way that it is from
Sacred Scripture that actions and signs derive their meaning.150
Language should be used that corresponds to the capacity for understanding of the
faithful and is suitable for public proclamation, while maintaining those characteristics
that are proper to the different ways of speaking used in the biblical books.
It shall also be for Conferences of Bishops to prepare with care a translation of
392.
the other texts, so that, even though the character of each language is respected, the
meaning of the original Latin text is fully and faithfully rendered. In accomplishing this
task, it is desirable that the different literary genres used at Mass be taken into account,
such  as  the  presidential  prayers,  the  antiphons,  the  acclamations,  the  responses,  the
litanies of supplication, and so on.
It should be borne in mind that the primary purpose of the translation of the texts
is  not  for  meditation,  but  rather  for  their  proclamation  or  singing  during  an  actual
celebration.
Language  should  be  used  that  is  accommodated  to  the  faithful  of  the  region,  but
is noble and marked by literary quality, even though there will always be a necessity
for  some  catechesis  on  the  biblical  and  Christian  meaning  of  certain  words  and
expressions.
Moreover,  it  is  preferable  that  in  regions  that  share  the  same  language,  the  same
translation  be  used  insofar  as  possible  for  liturgical  texts,  especially  for  biblical  texts
and for the Order of Mass.151
Bearing  in  mind  the  important  place  that  singing  has  in  a  celebration  as  a
393.
necessary or integral part of the Liturgy,152 all musical settings especially for the texts of
the Ordinary of Mass, for the people’s responses and acclamations and for the special
rites that occur in the course of the liturgical year must be submitted to the Conference
of Bishops of England and Wales for review and approval prior to publication.
Likewise it is for the Conference to judge which musical forms, melodies, and musical
instruments  may  be  lawfully  admitted  into  divine  worship,  insofar  as  these  are  truly
suitable for sacred use, or can be made suitable.
394.
Each diocese should have its own Calendar and Proper of Masses. For its part, the
Conference of Bishops should draw up a proper Calendar for the nation or, together
with other Conferences, a Calendar for a wider territory, to be approved by the Apostolic
See.153
In  carrying  out  this  task,  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  the  Lord’s  Day  is  to  be
preserved and safeguarded, as the primordial feast day, and hence other celebrations,
unless they are truly of the greatest importance, should not have precedence over it.154
Care should likewise be taken that the liturgical year as revised by decree of the Second
vatican Council not be obscured by secondary elements.
150
151
152
153
154
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 24.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 36 § 3.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 112.
 Cf. *Universal Norms on the Liturgical Year and the Calendar*, nos. 48-51, infra, p. 99; Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship, Instruc-
tion, *Calendaria particularia*, 24 June 1970, nos. 4, 8: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 62 (1970), pp. 652-653.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 106.
In the drawing up of the Calendar of a nation, the Rogation Days and Ember Days
should be indicated (cf. no. 373), as well as the forms and texts for their celebration,155
and other special measures should also be kept in mind.
It is appropriate that in publishing the Missal, celebrations proper to an entire nation
or  territory  be  inserted  at  the  proper  place  among  the  celebrations  of  the  General
Calendar,  while  those  proper  to  a  region  or  diocese  should  have  a  place  in  a  special
appendix.
395.
Finally,  if  the  participation  of  the  faithful  and  their  spiritual  welfare  require
variations and profounder adaptations in order for the sacred celebration to correspond
with the culture and traditions of the different nations, then Conferences of Bishops
may propose these to the Apostolic See in accordance with article 40 of the Constitution
on the Sacred Liturgy for introduction with the Apostolic See’s consent, especially in
the  case  of  nations  to  whom  the  Gospel  has  been  more  recently  proclaimed.156  The
special  norms  handed  down  by  means  of  the  *Instruction  on  the  Roman  Liturgy  and 
*
*Inculturation*157 should be attentively observed.
As regards the procedures in this matter, these should be observed:
Firstly, a detailed preliminary proposal should be set before the Apostolic See, so that,
after the necessary faculty has been granted, the detailed working out of the individual
points of adaptation may proceed.
Once  these  proposals  have  been duly approved by  the  Apostolic  See, experiments
should be carried out for specified periods and at specified places. When the period
of  experimentation  is  concluded,  the  Conference  of  Bishops  shall  decide,  if  the  case
requires, upon pursuing the adaptations and shall submit a mature formulation of the
matter to the judgement of the Apostolic See.158
However, before proceeding to new adaptations, especially profounder ones, great
396.
care shall be taken to promote due instruction of the clergy and the faithful in a wise
and  orderly  manner,  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  the  faculties  already  foreseen  and  to
apply fully the pastoral norms in keeping with the spirit of the celebration.
The  principle  shall  moreover  be  respected,  according  to  which  each  particular
397.
Church must be in accord with the universal Church not only regarding the doctrine
of the faith and sacramental signs, but also as to the usages universally received from
apostolic and unbroken tradition. These are to be kept not only so that errors may be
avoided, but also so that the faith may be handed on in its integrity, since the Church’s
rule of prayer (*lex orandi*) corresponds to her rule of faith (*lex credendi*).159
The Roman Rite constitutes a notable and precious part of the liturgical treasure and
patrimony of the Catholic Church; its riches are conducive to the good of the universal
Church, so that their loss would gravely harm her.
This Rite has in the course of the centuries not only preserved the liturgical usages that
arose in the city of Rome, but has also in a deep, organic, and harmonious way integrated
into itself certain other usages derived from the customs and culture of different peoples
and of various particular Churches whether of the West or the East, so acquiring a certain
supra-regional character. As to our own times, the identity and unitary expression of
this Rite is found in the typical editions of the liturgical books promulgated by authority
of the Supreme Pontiff, and in the liturgical books corresponding to them approved for
155
156
157
158
159
 Cf. *Universal Norms on the Liturgical Year and the Calendar*, nos. 48-51, infra, p. 99; Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship, Instruc-
tion, *Calendaria particularia*, 24 June 1970, no. 38: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 62 (1970), p. 660.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, nos. 37-40.
 Cf. Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Varietates legitimae, *25 January 1994, nos. 54,
62-69: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), pp. 308-309, 311-313.
 Cf. *ibidem,* nos. 66-68: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), p. 313.
 Cf. *ibidem,* nos. 26-27: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), pp. 298-299.
68  *General Instruction of the Roman Missal
*
their territories by the Conferences of Bishops and endowed with the *recognitio* of the
Apostolic See.160
The norm established by the Second vatican Council, namely that in the liturgical
398.
renewal innovations should not be made unless required by true and certain usefulness
to the Church, nor without exercising caution to ensure that new forms grow in some
sense organically from forms already existing,161 must also be applied to implementation
of the inculturation of the Roman Rite as such.162 Inculturation, moreover, requires a
necessary length of time, lest the authentic liturgical tradition suffer hasty and incautious
contamination.
Finally,  the  pursuit  of  inculturation  does  not  have  as  its  purpose  in  any  way  the
creation of new families of rites, but aims rather at meeting the needs of a particular
culture,  though  in  such  a  way  that  adaptations  introduced  either  into  the  Missal  or
coordinated with other liturgical books are not at variance with the proper character of
the Roman Rite.163
399.
And so, the Roman Missal, though in a diversity of languages and with some variety
of customs,164 must in the future be safeguarded as an instrument and an outstanding
sign of the integrity and unity of the Roman Rite.165
160
161
162
163
164
165
 Cf. John Paul II, Apostolic Letter, *Vicesimus quintus annus, *4 December 1988, no. 16: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 81 (1989), p. 912; Con-
gregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Varietates legitimae, *25 January 1994, nos. 2, 36: *Acta 
*
*Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), pp. 288, 302.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 23.
 Cf. Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, Instruction, *Varietates legitimae, *25 January 1994, no. 46:
*Acta Apostolicae Sedis* 87 (1995), p. 306.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 36: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *87 (1995), p. 302.
 Cf. *ibidem,* no. 54: *Acta Apostolicae Sedis *87 (1995), pp. 308-309.
 Cf. Second Ecumenical Council of the vatican, Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, *Sacrosanctum Concilium*, no. 38; Paul vI, Apostolic
Constitution, *Missale Romanum, *above, p. 00.
*Contents  *69